CHAPTER I: OF GOLDEN WALTER AND HIS FATHER


Awhile ago there was a young man dwelling in a great and goodly city by
the sea which had to name Langton on Holm.   He was but of five and
twenty winters, a fair-faced man, yellow-haired, tall and strong; rather
wiser than foolisher than young men are mostly wont; a valiant youth, and
a kind; not of many words but courteous of speech; no roisterer, nought
masterful, but peaceable and knowing how to forbear: in a fray a perilous
foe, and a trusty war-fellow.   His father, with whom he was dwelling
when this tale begins, was a great merchant, richer than a baron of the
land, a head-man of the greatest of the Lineages of Langton, and a
captain of the Porte; he was of the Lineage of the Goldings, therefore
was he called Bartholomew Golden, and his son Golden Walter.

Now ye may well deem that such a youngling as this was looked upon by all
as a lucky man without a lack; but there was this flaw in his lot,
whereas he had fallen into the toils of love of a woman exceeding fair,
and had taken her to wife, she nought unwilling as it seemed.   But when
they had been wedded some six months he found by manifest tokens, that
his fairness was not so much to her but that she must seek to the
foulness of one worser than he in all ways; wherefore his rest departed
from him, whereas he hated her for her untruth and her hatred of him; yet
would the sound of her voice, as she came and went in the house, make his
heart beat; and the sight of her stirred desire within him, so that he
longed for her to be sweet and kind with him, and deemed that, might it
be so, he should forget all the evil gone by.   But it was not so; for
ever when she saw him, her face changed, and her hatred of him became
manifest, and howsoever she were sweet with others, with him she was hard
and sour.

So this went on a while till the chambers of his father's house, yea the
very streets of the city, became loathsome to him; and yet he called to
mind that the world was wide and he but a young man.   So on a day as he
sat with his father alone, he spake to him and said: "Father, I was on
the quays even now, and I looked on the ships that were nigh boun, and
thy sign I saw on a tall ship that seemed to me nighest boun.   Will it
be long ere she sail?"

"Nay," said his father, "that ship, which hight the Katherine, will they
warp out of the haven in two days' time.   But why askest thou of her?"

"The shortest word is best, father," said Walter, "and this it is, that I
would depart in the said ship and see other lands."

"Yea and whither, son?" said the merchant.

"Whither she goeth," said Walter, "for I am ill at ease at home, as thou
wottest, father."

The merchant held his peace awhile, and looked hard on his son, for there
was strong love between them; but at last he said: "Well, son, maybe it
were best for thee; but maybe also we shall not meet again."

"Yet if we do meet, father, then shalt thou see a new man in me."

"Well," said Bartholomew, "at least I know on whom to lay the loss of
thee, and when thou art gone, for thou shalt have thine own way herein,
she shall no longer abide in my house.   Nay, but it were for the strife
that should arise thenceforth betwixt her kindred and ours, it should go
somewhat worse with her than that."

Said Walter: "I pray thee shame her not more than needs must be, lest, so
doing, thou shame both me and thyself also."

Bartholomew held his peace again for a while; then he said: "Goeth she
with child, my son?"

Walter reddened, and said: "I wot not; nor of whom the child may be."
Then they both sat silent, till Bartholomew spake, saying: "The end of it
is, son, that this is Monday, and that thou shalt go aboard in the small
hours of Wednesday; and meanwhile I shall look to it that thou go not
away empty-handed; the skipper of the Katherine is a good man and true,
and knows the seas well; and my servant Robert the Low, who is clerk of
the lading, is trustworthy and wise, and as myself in all matters that
look towards chaffer.   The Katherine is new and stout-builded, and
should be lucky, whereas she is under the ward of her who is the saint
called upon in the church where thou wert christened, and myself before
thee; and thy mother, and my father and mother all lie under the chancel
thereof, as thou wottest."

Therewith the elder rose up and went his ways about his business, and
there was no more said betwixt him and his son on this matter.




CHAPTER II: GOLDEN WALTER TAKES SHIP TO SAIL THE SEAS


When Walter went down to the Katherine next morning, there was the
skipper Geoffrey, who did him reverence, and made him all cheer, and
showed him his room aboard ship, and the plenteous goods which his father
had sent down to the quays already, such haste as he had made.  Walter
thanked his father's love in his heart, but otherwise took little heed to
his affairs, but wore away the time about the haven, gazing listlessly on
the ships that were making them ready outward, or unlading, and the
mariners and aliens coming and going: and all these were to him as the
curious images woven on a tapestry.

At last when he had wellnigh come back again to the Katherine, he saw
there a tall ship, which he had scarce noted before, a ship all-boun,
which had her boats out, and men sitting to the oars thereof ready to tow
her outwards when the hawser should be cast off, and by seeming her
mariners were but abiding for some one or other to come aboard.

So Walter stood idly watching the said ship, and as he looked, lo! folk
passing him toward the gangway.  These were three; first came a dwarf,
dark-brown of hue and hideous, with long arms and ears exceeding great
and dog-teeth that stuck out like the fangs of a wild beast.  He was clad
in a rich coat of yellow silk, and bare in his hand a crooked bow, and
was girt with a broad sax.

After him came a maiden, young by seeming, of scarce twenty summers; fair
of face as a flower; grey-eyed, brown-haired, with lips full and red,
slim and gentle of body.  Simple was her array, of a short and strait
green gown, so that on her right ankle was clear to see an iron ring.

Last of the three was a lady, tall and stately, so radiant of visage and
glorious of raiment, that it were hard to say what like she was; for
scarce might the eye gaze steady upon her exceeding beauty; yet must
every son of Adam who found himself anigh her, lift up his eyes again
after he had dropped them, and look again on her, and yet again and yet
again.  Even so did Walter, and as the three passed by him, it seemed to
him as if all the other folk there about had vanished and were nought;
nor had he any vision before his eyes of any looking on them, save
himself alone.  They went over the gangway into the ship, and he saw them
go along the deck till they came to the house on the poop, and entered it
and were gone from his sight.

There he stood staring, till little by little the thronging people of the
quays came into his eye-shot again; then he saw how the hawser was cast
off and the boats fell to tugging the big ship toward the harbour-mouth
with hale and how of men.  Then the sail fell down from the yard and was
sheeted home and filled with the fair wind as the ship's bows ran up on
the first green wave outside the haven.  Even therewith the shipmen cast
abroad a banner, whereon was done in a green field a grim wolf ramping up
against a maiden, and so went the ship upon her way.

Walter stood awhile staring at her empty place where the waves ran into
the haven-mouth, and then turned aside and toward the Katherine; and at
first he was minded to go ask shipmaster Geoffrey of what he knew
concerning the said ship and her alien wayfarers; but then it came into
his mind, that all this was but an imagination or dream of the day, and
that he were best to leave it untold to any.  So therewith he went his
way from the water-side, and through the streets unto his father's house;
but when he was but a little way thence, and the door was before him, him-
seemed for a moment of time that he beheld those three coming out down
the steps of stone and into the street; to wit the dwarf, the maiden, and
the stately lady: but when he stood still to abide their coming, and
looked toward them, lo! there was nothing before him save the goodly
house of Bartholomew Golden, and three children and a cur dog playing
about the steps thereof, and about him were four or five passers-by going
about their business.  Then was he all confused in his mind, and knew not
what to make of it, whether those whom he had seemed to see pass aboard
ship were but images of a dream, or children of Adam in very flesh.

Howsoever, he entered the house, and found his father in the chamber, and
fell to speech with him about their matters; but for all that he loved
his father, and worshipped him as a wise and valiant man, yet at that
hour he might not hearken the words of his mouth, so much was his mind
entangled in the thought of those three, and they were ever before his
eyes, as if they had been painted on a table by the best of limners.  And
of the two women he thought exceeding much, and cast no wyte upon himself
for running after the desire of strange women.  For he said to himself
that he desired not either of the twain; nay, he might not tell which of
the twain, the maiden or the stately queen, were clearest to his eyes;
but sore he desired to see both of them again, and to know what they
were.

So wore the hours till the Wednesday morning, and it was time that he
should bid farewell to his father and get aboard ship; but his father led
him down to the quays and on to the Katherine, and there Walter embraced
him, not without tears and forebodings; for his heart was full.  Then
presently the old man went aland; the gangway was unshipped, the hawsers
cast off; the oars of the towing-boats splashed in the dark water, the
sail fell down from the yard, and was sheeted home, and out plunged the
Katherine into the misty sea and rolled up the grey slopes, casting
abroad her ancient withal, whereon was beaten the token of Bartholomew
Golden, to wit a B and a G to the right and the left, and thereabove a
cross and a triangle rising from the midst.

Walter stood on the stern and beheld, yet more with the mind of him than
with his eyes; for it all seemed but the double of what the other ship
had done; and the thought of it as if the twain were as beads strung on
one string and led away by it into the same place, and thence to go in
the like order, and so on again and again, and never to draw nigher to
each other.




CHAPTER III: WALTER HEARETH TIDINGS OF THE DEATH OF HIS FATHER


Fast sailed the Katherine over the seas, and nought befell to tell of,
either to herself or her crew.  She came to one cheaping-town and then to
another, and so on to a third and a fourth; and at each was buying and
selling after the manner of chapmen; and Walter not only looked on the
doings of his father's folk, but lent a hand, what he might, to help them
in all matters, whether it were in seaman's craft, or in chaffer.  And
the further he went and the longer the time wore, the more he was eased
of his old trouble wherein his wife and her treason had to do.

But as for the other trouble, to wit his desire and longing to come up
with those three, it yet flickered before him; and though he had not seen
them again as one sees people in the streets, and as if he might touch
them if he would, yet were their images often before his mind's eye; and
yet, as time wore, not so often, nor so troublously; and forsooth both to
those about him and to himself, he seemed as a man well healed of his
melancholy mood.

Now they left that fourth stead, and sailed over the seas and came to a
fifth, a very great and fair city, which they had made more than seven
months from Langton on Holm; and by this time was Walter taking heed and
joyance in such things as were toward in that fair city, so far from his
kindred, and especially he looked on the fair women there, and desired
them, and loved them; but lightly, as befalleth young men.

Now this was the last country whereto the Katherine was boun; so there
they abode some ten months in daily chaffer, and in pleasuring them in
beholding all that there was of rare and goodly, and making merry with
the merchants and the towns-folk, and the country-folk beyond the gates,
and Walter was grown as busy and gay as a strong young man is like to be,
and was as one who would fain be of some account amongst his own folk.

But at the end of this while, it befell on a day, as he was leaving his
hostel for his booth in the market, and had the door in his hand, there
stood before him three mariners in the guise of his own country, and with
them was one of clerkly aspect, whom he knew at once for his father's
scrivener, Arnold Penstrong by name; and when Walter saw him his heart
failed him and he cried out: "Arnold, what tidings?  Is all well with the
folk at Langton?"

Said Arnold: "Evil tidings are come with me; matters are ill with thy
folk; for I may not hide that thy father, Bartholomew Golden, is dead,
God rest his soul."

At that word it was to Walter as if all that trouble which but now had
sat so light upon him, was once again fresh and heavy, and that his past
life of the last few months had never been; and it was to him as if he
saw his father lying dead on his bed, and heard the folk lamenting about
the house.  He held his peace awhile, and then he said in a voice as of
an angry man:

"What, Arnold! and did he die in his bed, or how? for he was neither old
nor ailing when we parted."

Said Arnold: "Yea, in his bed he died: but first he was somewhat sword-
bitten."

"Yea, and how?" quoth Walter.

Said Arnold: "When thou wert gone, in a few days' wearing, thy father
sent thy wife out of his house back to her kindred of the Reddings with
no honour, and yet with no such shame as might have been, without blame
to us of those who knew the tale of thee and her; which, God-a-mercy,
will be pretty much the whole of the city."

"Nevertheless, the Reddings took it amiss, and would have a mote with us
Goldings to talk of booting.  By ill-luck we yea-said that for the saving
of the city's peace.  But what betid?  We met in our Gild-hall, and there
befell the talk between us; and in that talk certain words could not be
hidden, though they were none too seemly nor too meek.  And the said
words once spoken drew forth the whetted steel; and there then was the
hewing and thrusting!  Two of ours were slain outright on the floor, and
four of theirs, and many were hurt on either side.  Of these was thy
father, for as thou mayst well deem, he was nought backward in the fray;
but despite his hurts, two in the side and one on the arm, he went home
on his own feet, and we deemed that we had come to our above.  But well-a-
way! it was an evil victory, whereas in ten days he died of his hurts.
God have his soul!  But now, my master, thou mayst well wot that I am not
come to tell thee this only, but moreover to bear the word of the
kindred, to wit that thou come back with me straightway in the swift
cutter which hath borne me and the tidings; and thou mayst look to it,
that though she be swift and light, she is a keel full weatherly."

Then said Walter: "This is a bidding of war.  Come back will I, and the
Reddings shall wot of my coming.  Are ye all-boun?"

"Yea," said Arnold, "we may up anchor this very day, or to-morrow morn at
latest.  But what aileth thee, master, that thou starest so wild over my
shoulder?  I pray thee take it not so much to heart!  Ever it is the wont
of fathers to depart this world before their sons."

But Walter's visage from wrathful red had become pale, and he pointed up
street, and cried out: "Look! dost thou see?"

"See what, master?" quoth Arnold: "what! here cometh an ape in gay
raiment; belike the beast of some jongleur.  Nay, by God's wounds! 'tis a
man, though he be exceeding mis-shapen like a very devil.  Yea and now
there cometh a pretty maid going as if she were of his meney; and lo!
here, a most goodly and noble lady!  Yea, I see; and doubtless she owneth
both the two, and is of the greatest of the folk of this fair city; for
on the maiden's ankle I saw an iron ring, which betokeneth thralldom
amongst these aliens.  But this is strange! for notest thou not how the
folk in the street heed not this quaint show; nay not even the stately
lady, though she be as lovely as a goddess of the gentiles, and beareth
on her gems that would buy Langton twice over; surely they must be over-
wont to strange and gallant sights.  But now, master, but now!"

"Yea, what is it?" said Walter.

"Why, master, they should not yet be gone out of eye-shot, yet gone they
are.  What is become of them, are they sunk into the earth?"

"Tush, man!" said Walter, looking not on Arnold, but still staring down
the street; "they have gone into some house while thine eyes were turned
from them a moment."

"Nay, master, nay," said Arnold, "mine eyes were not off them one instant
of time."

"Well," said Walter, somewhat snappishly, "they are gone now, and what
have we to do to heed such toys, we with all this grief and strife on our
hands?  Now would I be alone to turn the matter of thine errand over in
my mind.  Meantime do thou tell the shipmaster Geoffrey and our other
folk of these tidings, and thereafter get thee all ready; and come hither
to me before sunrise to-morrow, and I shall be ready for my part; and so
sail we back to Langton."

Therewith he turned him back into the house, and the others went their
ways; but Walter sat alone in his chamber a long while, and pondered
these things in his mind.  And whiles he made up his mind that he would
think no more of the vision of those three, but would fare back to
Langton, and enter into the strife with the Reddings and quell them, or
die else.  But lo, when he was quite steady in this doom, and his heart
was lightened thereby, he found that he thought no more of the Reddings
and their strife, but as matters that were passed and done with, and that
now he was thinking and devising if by any means he might find out in
what land dwelt those three.  And then again he strove to put that from
him, saying that what he had seen was but meet for one brainsick, and a
dreamer of dreams.  But furthermore he thought, Yea, and was Arnold, who
this last time had seen the images of those three, a dreamer of waking
dreams? for he was nought wonted in such wise; then thought he: At least
I am well content that he spake to me of their likeness, not I to him;
for so I may tell that there was at least something before my eyes which
grew not out of mine own brain.  And yet again, why should I follow them;
and what should I get by it; and indeed how shall I set about it?

Thus he turned the matter over and over; and at last, seeing that if he
grew no foolisher over it, he grew no wiser, he became weary thereof, and
bestirred him, and saw to the trussing up of his goods, and made all
ready for his departure, and so wore the day and slept at nightfall; and
at daybreak comes Arnold to lead him to their keel, which hight the
Bartholomew.  He tarried nought, and with few farewells went aboard ship,
and an hour after they were in the open sea with the ship's head turned
toward Langton on Holm.




CHAPTER IV: STORM BEFALLS THE BARTHOLOMEW, AND SHE IS DRIVEN OFF HER
COURSE


Now swift sailed the Bartholomew for four weeks toward the north-west
with a fair wind, and all was well with ship and crew.  Then the wind
died out on even of a day, so that the ship scarce made way at all,
though she rolled in a great swell of the sea, so great, that it seemed
to ridge all the main athwart.  Moreover down in the west was a great
bank of cloud huddled up in haze, whereas for twenty days past the sky
had been clear, save for a few bright white clouds flying before the
wind.  Now the shipmaster, a man right cunning in his craft, looked long
on sea and sky, and then turned and bade the mariners take in sail and be
right heedful.  And when Walter asked him what he looked for, and
wherefore he spake not to him thereof, he said surlily: "Why should I
tell thee what any fool can see without telling, to wit that there is
weather to hand?"

So they abode what should befall, and Walter went to his room to sleep
away the uneasy while, for the night was now fallen; and he knew no more
till he was waked up by great hubbub and clamour of the shipmen, and the
whipping of ropes, and thunder of flapping sails, and the tossing and
weltering of the ship withal.  But, being a very stout-hearted young man,
he lay still in his room, partly because he was a landsman, and had no
mind to tumble about amongst the shipmen and hinder them; and withal he
said to himself: What matter whether I go down to the bottom of the sea,
or come back to Langton, since either way my life or my death will take
away from me the fulfilment of desire?  Yet soothly if there hath been a
shift of wind, that is not so ill; for then shall we be driven to other
lands, and so at the least our home-coming shall be delayed, and other
tidings may hap amidst of our tarrying.  So let all be as it will.

So in a little while, in spite of the ship's wallowing and the tumult of
the wind and waves, he fell asleep again, and woke no more till it was
full daylight, and there was the shipmaster standing in the door of his
room, the sea-water all streaming from his wet-weather raiment.  He said
to Walter: "Young master, the sele of the day to thee!  For by good hap
we have gotten into another day.  Now I shall tell thee that we have
striven to beat, so as not to be driven off our course, but all would not
avail, wherefore for these three hours we have been running before the
wind; but, fair sir, so big hath been the sea that but for our ship being
of the stoutest, and our men all yare, we had all grown exceeding wise
concerning the ground of the mid-main.  Praise be to St. Nicholas and all
Hallows! for though ye shall presently look upon a new sea, and maybe a
new land to boot, yet is that better than looking on the ugly things down
below."

"Is all well with ship and crew then?" said Walter.

"Yea forsooth," said the shipmaster; "verily the Bartholomew is the
darling of Oak Woods; come up and look at it, how she is dealing with
wind and waves all free from fear."

So Walter did on his foul-weather raiment, and went up on to the quarter-
deck, and there indeed was a change of days; for the sea was dark and
tumbling mountain-high, and the white-horses were running down the
valleys thereof, and the clouds drave low over all, and bore a scud of
rain along with them; and though there was but a rag of sail on her, the
ship flew before the wind, rolling a great wash of water from bulwark to
bulwark.

Walter stood looking on it all awhile, holding on by a stay-rope, and
saying to himself that it was well that they were driving so fast toward
new things.

Then the shipmaster came up to him and clapped him on the shoulder and
said: "Well, shipmate, cheer up! and now come below again and eat some
meat, and drink a cup with me."

So Walter went down and ate and drank, and his heart was lighter than it
had been since he had heard of his father's death, and the feud awaiting
him at home, which forsooth he had deemed would stay his wanderings a
weary while, and therewithal his hopes.  But now it seemed as if he needs
must wander, would he, would he not; and so it was that even this fed his
hope; so sore his heart clung to that desire of his to seek home to those
three that seemed to call him unto them.




CHAPTER V: NOW THEY COME TO A NEW LAND


Three days they drave before the wind, and on the fourth the clouds
lifted, the sun shone out and the offing was clear; the wind had much
abated, though it still blew a breeze, and was a head wind for sailing
toward the country of Langton.  So then the master said that, since they
were bewildered, and the wind so ill to deal with, it were best to go
still before the wind that they might make some land and get knowledge of
their whereabouts from the folk thereof.  Withal he said that he deemed
the land not to be very far distant.

So did they, and sailed on pleasantly enough, for the weather kept on
mending, and the wind fell till it was but a light breeze, yet still foul
for Langton.

So wore three days, and on the eve of the third, the man from the topmast
cried out that he saw land ahead; and so did they all before the sun was
quite set, though it were but a cloud no bigger than a man's hand.

When night fell they struck not sail, but went forth toward the land fair
and softly; for it was early summer, so that the nights were neither long
nor dark.

But when it was broad daylight, they opened a land, a long shore of rocks
and mountains, and nought else that they could see at first.  Nevertheless
as day wore and they drew nigher, first they saw how the mountains fell
away from the sea, and were behind a long wall of sheer cliff; and coming
nigher yet, they beheld a green plain going up after a little in green
bents and slopes to the feet of the said cliff-wall.

No city nor haven did they see there, not even when they were far nigher
to the land; nevertheless, whereas they hankered for the peace of the
green earth after all the tossing and unrest of the sea, and whereas also
they doubted not to find at the least good and fresh water, and belike
other bait in the plain under the mountains, they still sailed on not
unmerrily; so that by nightfall they cast anchor in five-fathom water
hard by the shore.

Next morning they found that they were lying a little way off the mouth
of a river not right great; so they put out their boats and towed the
ship up into the said river, and when they had gone up it for a mile or
thereabouts they found the sea water failed, for little was the ebb and
flow of the tide on that coast.  Then was the river deep and clear,
running between smooth grassy land like to meadows.  Also on their left
board they saw presently three head of neat cattle going, as if in a
meadow of a homestead in their own land, and a few sheep; and thereafter,
about a bow-draught from the river, they saw a little house of wood and
straw-thatch under a wooded mound, and with orchard trees about it.  They
wondered little thereat, for they knew no cause why that land should not
be builded, though it were in the far outlands.  However, they drew their
ship up to the bank, thinking that they would at least abide awhile and
ask tidings and have some refreshing of the green plain, which was so
lovely and pleasant.

But while they were busied herein they saw a man come out of the house,
and down to the river to meet them; and they soon saw that he was tall
and old, long-hoary of hair and beard, and clad mostly in the skins of
beasts.

He drew nigh without any fear or mistrust, and coming close to them gave
them the sele of the day in a kindly and pleasant voice.  The shipmaster
greeted him in his turn, and said withal: "Old man, art thou the king of
this country?"

The elder laughed; "It hath had none other a long while," said he; "and
at least there is no other son of Adam here to gainsay."

"Thou art alone here then?" said the master.

"Yea," said the old man; "save for the beasts of the field and the wood,
and the creeping things, and fowl.  Wherefore it is sweet to me to hear
your voices."

Said the master: "Where be the other houses of the town?"

The old man laughed.  Said he: "When I said that I was alone, I meant
that I was alone in the land and not only alone in this stead.  There is
no house save this betwixt the sea and the dwellings of the Bears, over
the cliff-wall yonder, yea and a long way over it."

"Yea," quoth the shipmaster grinning, "and be the bears of thy country so
manlike, that they dwell in builded houses?"

The old man shook his head.  "Sir," said he, "as to their bodily fashion,
it is altogether manlike, save that they be one and all higher and bigger
than most.  For they be bears only in name; they be a nation of half wild
men; for I have been told by them that there be many more than that tribe
whose folk I have seen, and that they spread wide about behind these
mountains from east to west.  Now, sir, as to their souls and
understandings I warrant them not; for miscreants they be, trowing
neither in God nor his hallows."

Said the master: "Trow they in Mahound then?"

"Nay," said the elder, "I wot not for sure that they have so much as a
false God; though I have it from them that they worship a certain woman
with mickle worship."

Then spake Walter: "Yea, good sir, and how knowest thou that? dost thou
deal with them at all?"

Said the old man: "Whiles some of that folk come hither and have of me
what I can spare; a calf or two, or a half-dozen of lambs or hoggets; or
a skin of wine or cyder of mine own making: and they give me in return
such things as I can use, as skins of hart and bear and other peltries;
for now I am old, I can but little of the hunting hereabout.  Whiles,
also, they bring little lumps of pure copper, and would give me gold
also, but it is of little use in this lonely land.  Sooth to say, to me
they are not masterful or rough-handed; but glad am I that they have been
here but of late, and are not like to come again this while; for terrible
they are of aspect, and whereas ye be aliens, belike they would not hold
their hands from off you; and moreover ye have weapons and other matters
which they would covet sorely."

Quoth the master: "Since thou dealest with these wild men, will ye not
deal with us in chaffer?  For whereas we are come from long travel, we
hanker after fresh victual, and here aboard are many things which were
for thine avail."

Said the old man: "All that I have is yours, so that ye do but leave me
enough till my next ingathering: of wine and cyder, such as it is, I have
plenty for your service; ye may drink it till it is all gone, if ye will:
a little corn and meal I have, but not much; yet are ye welcome thereto,
since the standing corn in my garth is done blossoming, and I have other
meat.  Cheeses have I and dried fish; take what ye will thereof.  But as
to my neat and sheep, if ye have sore need of any, and will have them, I
may not say you nay: but I pray you if ye may do without them, not to
take my milch-beasts or their engenderers; for, as ye have heard me say,
the Bear-folk have been here but of late, and they have had of me all I
might spare: but now let me tell you, if ye long after flesh-meat, that
there is venison of hart and hind, yea, and of buck and doe, to be had on
this plain, and about the little woods at the feet of the rock-wall
yonder: neither are they exceeding wild; for since I may not take them, I
scare them not, and no other man do they see to hurt them; for the Bear-
folk come straight to my house, and fare straight home thence.  But I
will lead you the nighest way to where the venison is easiest to be
gotten.  As to the wares in your ship, if ye will give me aught I will
take it with a good will; and chiefly if ye have a fair knife or two and
a roll of linen cloth, that were a good refreshment to me.  But in any
case what I have to give is free to you and welcome."

The shipmaster laughed: "Friend," said he, "we can thee mickle thanks for
all that thou biddest us.  And wot well that we be no lifters or
sea-thieves to take thy livelihood from thee.  So to-morrow, if thou
wilt, we will go with thee and upraise the hunt, and meanwhile we will
come aland, and walk on the green grass, and water our ship with thy good
fresh water."

So the old carle went back to his house to make them ready what cheer he
might, and the shipmen, who were twenty and one, all told, what with the
mariners and Arnold and Walter's servants, went ashore, all but two who
watched the ship and abode their turn.  They went well-weaponed, for both
the master and Walter deemed wariness wisdom, lest all might not be so
good as it seemed.  They took of their sail-cloths ashore and tilted them
in on the meadow betwixt the house and the ship, and the carle brought
them what he had for their avail, of fresh fruits, and cheeses, and milk,
and wine, and cyder, and honey, and there they feasted nowise ill, and
were right fain.




CHAPTER VI: THE OLD MAN TELLS WALTER OF HIMSELF.  WALTER SEES A SHARD IN
THE CLIFF-WALL


But when they had done their meat and drink the master and the shipmen
went about the watering of the ship, and the others strayed off along the
meadow, so that presently Walter was left alone with the carle, and fell
to speech with him and said: "Father, meseemeth thou shouldest have some
strange tale to tell, and as yet we have asked thee of nought save meat
for our bellies: now if I ask thee concerning thy life, and how thou
camest hither, and abided here, wilt thou tell me aught?"

The old man smiled on him and said: "Son, my tale were long to tell; and
mayhappen concerning much thereof my memory should fail me; and withal
there is grief therein, which I were loth to awaken: nevertheless if thou
ask, I will answer as I may, and in any case will tell thee nought save
the truth."

Said Walter: "Well then, hast thou been long here?"

"Yea," said the carle, "since I was a young man, and a stalwarth knight."

Said Walter: "This house, didst thou build it, and raise these garths,
and plant orchard and vineyard, and gather together the neat and the
sheep, or did some other do all this for thee?"

Said the carle: "I did none of all this; there was one here before me,
and I entered into his inheritance, as though this were a lordly manor,
with a fair castle thereon, and all well stocked and plenished."

Said Walter: "Didst thou find thy foregoer alive here?"

"Yea," said the elder, "yet he lived but for a little while after I came
to him."

He was silent a while, and then he said: "I slew him: even so would he
have it, though I bade him a better lot."

Said Walter: "Didst thou come hither of thine own will?"

"Mayhappen," said the carle; "who knoweth?  Now have I no will to do
either this or that.  It is wont that maketh me do, or refrain."

Said Walter: "Tell me this; why didst thou slay the man? did he any
scathe to thee?"

Said the elder: "When I slew him, I deemed that he was doing me all
scathe: but now I know that it was not so.  Thus it was: I would needs go
where he had been before, and he stood in the path against me; and I
overthrew him, and went on the way I would."

"What came thereof?" said Walter.

"Evil came of it," said the carle.

Then was Walter silent a while, and the old man spake nothing; but there
came a smile in his face that was both sly and somewhat sad.  Walter
looked on him and said: "Was it from hence that thou wouldst go that
road?"

"Yea," said the carle.

Said Walter: "And now wilt thou tell me what that road was; whither it
went and whereto it led, that thou must needs wend it, though thy first
stride were over a dead man?"

"I will not tell thee," said the carle.

Then they held their peace, both of them, and thereafter got on to other
talk of no import.

So wore the day till night came; and they slept safely, and on the morrow
after they had broken their fast, the more part of them set off with the
carle to the hunting, and they went, all of them, a three hours' faring
towards the foot of the cliffs, which was all grown over with coppice,
hazel and thorn, with here and there a big oak or ash-tree; there it was,
said the old man, where the venison was most and best.

Of their hunting need nought be said, saving that when the carle had put
them on the track of the deer and shown them what to do, he came back
again with Walter, who had no great lust for the hunting, and sorely
longed to have some more talk with the said carle.  He for his part
seemed nought loth thereto, and so led Walter to a mound or hillock
amidst the clear of the plain, whence all was to be seen save where the
wood covered it; but just before where they now lay down there was no
wood, save low bushes, betwixt them and the rock-wall; and Walter noted
that whereas otherwhere, save in one place whereto their eyes were
turned, the cliffs seemed wellnigh or quite sheer, or indeed in some
places beetling over, in that said place they fell away from each other
on either side; and before this sinking was a slope or scree, that went
gently up toward the sinking of the wall.  Walter looked long and
earnestly at this place, and spake nought, till the carle said: "What!
thou hast found something before thee to look on.  What is it then?"

Quoth Walter: "Some would say that where yonder slopes run together up
towards that sinking in the cliff-wall there will be a pass into the
country beyond."

The carle smiled and said: "Yea, son; nor, so saying, would they err; for
that is the pass into the Bear-country, whereby those huge men come down
to chaffer with me."

"Yea," said Walter; and therewith he turned him a little, and scanned the
rock-wall, and saw how a few miles from that pass it turned somewhat
sharply toward the sea, narrowing the plain much there, till it made a
bight, the face whereof looked wellnigh north, instead of west, as did
the more part of the wall.  And in the midst of that northern-looking
bight was a dark place which seemed to Walter like a downright shard in
the cliff.  For the face of the wall was of a bleak grey, and it was but
little furrowed.

So then Walter spake: "Lo, old friend, there yonder is again a place that
meseemeth is a pass; whereunto doth that one lead?"  And he pointed to
it: but the old man did not follow the pointing of his finger, but,
looking down on the ground, answered confusedly, and said:

"Maybe: I wot not.  I deem that it also leadeth into the Bear-country by
a roundabout road.  It leadeth into the far land."

Walter answered nought: for a strange thought had come uppermost in his
mind, that the carle knew far more than he would say of that pass, and
that he himself might be led thereby to find the wondrous three.  He
caught his breath hardly, and his heart knocked against his ribs; but he
refrained from speaking for a long while; but at last he spake in a sharp
hard voice, which he scarce knew for his own: "Father, tell me, I adjure
thee by God and All-hallows, was it through yonder shard that the road
lay, when thou must needs make thy first stride over a dead man?"

The old man spake not a while, then he raised his head, and looked Walter
full in the eyes, and said in a steady voice: "NO, IT WAS NOT."
Thereafter they sat looking at each other a while; but at last Walter
turned his eyes away, but knew not what they beheld nor where he was, but
he was as one in a swoon.  For he knew full well that the carle had lied
to him, and that he might as well have said aye as no, and told him, that
it verily was by that same shard that he had stridden over a dead man.
Nevertheless he made as little semblance thereof as he might, and
presently came to himself, and fell to talking of other matters, that had
nought to do with the adventures of the land.  But after a while he spake
suddenly, and said: "My master, I was thinking of a thing."

"Yea, of what?" said the carle.

"Of this," said Walter; "that here in this land be strange adventures
toward, and that if we, and I in especial, were to turn our backs on
them, and go home with nothing done, it were pity of our lives: for all
will be dull and deedless there.  I was deeming it were good if we tried
the adventure."

"What adventure?" said the old man, rising up on his elbow and staring
sternly on him.

Said Walter: "The wending yonder pass to the eastward, whereby the huge
men come to thee from out of the Bear-country; that we might see what
should come thereof."

The carle leaned back again, and smiled and shook his head, and spake:
"That adventure were speedily proven: death would come of it, my son."

"Yea, and how?" said Walter.

The carle said: "The big men would take thee, and offer thee up as a
blood-offering to that woman, who is their Mawmet.  And if ye go all,
then shall they do the like with all of you."

Said Walter: "Is that sure?"

"Dead sure," said the carle.

"How knowest thou this?" said Walter.

"I have been there myself," said the carle.

"Yea," said Walter, "but thou camest away whole."

"Art thou sure thereof?" said the carle.

"Thou art alive yet, old man," said Walter, "for I have seen thee eat thy
meat, which ghosts use not to do."  And he laughed.

But the old man answered soberly: "If I escaped, it was by this, that
another woman saved me, and not often shall that befall.  Nor wholly was
I saved; my body escaped forsooth.  But where is my soul?  Where is my
heart, and my life?  Young man, I rede thee, try no such adventure; but
go home to thy kindred if thou canst.  Moreover, wouldst thou fare alone?
The others shall hinder thee."

Said Walter: "I am the master; they shall do as I bid them: besides, they
will be well pleased to share my goods amongst them if I give them a
writing to clear them of all charges which might be brought against
them."

"My son! my son!" said the carle, "I pray thee go not to thy death!"

Walter heard him silently, but as if he were persuaded to refrain; and
then the old man fell to, and told him much concerning this Bear-folk and
their customs, speaking very freely of them; but Walter's ears were
scarce open to this talk: whereas he deemed that he should have nought to
do with those wild men; and he durst not ask again concerning the country
whereto led the pass on the northward.




CHAPTER VII: WALTER COMES TO THE SHARD IN THE ROCK-WALL


As they were in converse thus, they heard the hunters blowing on their
horns all together; whereon the old man arose, and said: "I deem by the
blowing that the hunt will be over and done, and that they be blowing on
their fellows who have gone scatter-meal about the wood.  It is now some
five hours after noon, and thy men will be getting back with their
venison, and will be fainest of the victuals they have caught; therefore
will I hasten on before, and get ready fire and water and other matters
for the cooking.  Wilt thou come with me, young master, or abide thy men
here?"

Walter said lightly: "I will rest and abide them here; since I cannot
fail to see them hence as they go on their ways to thine house.  And it
may be well that I be at hand to command them and forbid, and put some
order amongst them, for rough playmates they be, some of them, and now
all heated with the hunting and the joy of the green earth."  Thus he
spoke, as if nought were toward save supper and bed; but inwardly hope
and fear were contending in him, and again his heart beat so hard, that
he deemed that the carle must surely hear it.  But the old man took him
but according to his outward seeming, and nodded his head, and went away
quietly toward his house.

When he had been gone a little, Walter rose up heedfully; he had with him
a scrip wherein was some cheese and hard-fish, and a little flasket of
wine; a short bow he had with him, and a quiver of arrows; and he was
girt with a strong and good sword, and a wood-knife withal.  He looked to
all this gear that it was nought amiss, and then speedily went down off
the mound, and when he was come down, he found that it covered him from
men coming out of the wood, if he went straight thence to that shard of
the rock-wall where was the pass that led southward.

Now it is no nay that thitherward he turned, and went wisely, lest the
carle should make a backward cast, and see him, or lest any straggler of
his own folk might happen upon him.

For to say sooth, he deemed that did they wind him, they would be like to
let him of his journey.  He had noted the bearings of the cliffs nigh the
shard, and whereas he could see their heads everywhere except from the
depths of the thicket, he was not like to go astray.

He had made no great way ere he heard the horns blowing all together
again in one place, and looking thitherward through the leafy boughs (for
he was now amidst of a thicket) he saw his men thronging the mound, and
had no doubt therefore that they were blowing on him; but being well
under cover he heeded it nought, and lying still a little, saw them go
down off the mound and go all of them toward the carle's house, still
blowing as they went, but not faring scatter-meal.  Wherefore it was
clear that they were nought troubled about him.

So he went on his way to the shard; and there is nothing to say of his
journey till he got before it with the last of the clear day, and entered
it straightway.  It was in sooth a downright breach or cleft in the rock-
wall, and there was no hill or bent leading up to it, nothing but a
tumble of stones before it, which was somewhat uneasy going, yet needed
nought but labour to overcome it, and when he had got over this, and was
in the very pass itself, he found it no ill going: forsooth at first it
was little worse than a rough road betwixt two great stony slopes, though
a little trickle of water ran down amidst of it.  So, though it was so
nigh nightfall, yet Walter pressed on, yea, and long after the very night
was come.  For the moon rose wide and bright a little after nightfall.
But at last he had gone so long, and was so wearied, that he deemed it
nought but wisdom to rest him, and so lay down on a piece of greensward
betwixt the stones, when he had eaten a morsel out of his satchel, and
drunk of the water out of the stream.  There as he lay, if he had any
doubt of peril, his weariness soon made it all one to him, for presently
he was sleeping as soundly as any man in Langton on Holm.




CHAPTER VIII: WALTER WENDS THE WASTE


Day was yet young when he awoke: he leapt to his feet, and went down to
the stream and drank of its waters, and washed the night off him in a
pool thereof, and then set forth on his way again.  When he had gone some
three hours, the road, which had been going up all the way, but somewhat
gently, grew steeper, and the bent on either side lowered, and lowered,
till it sank at last altogether, and then was he on a rough mountain-neck
with little grass, and no water; save that now and again was a soft place
with a flow amidst of it, and such places he must needs fetch a compass
about, lest he be mired.  He gave himself but little rest, eating what he
needs must as he went.  The day was bright and calm, so that the sun was
never hidden, and he steered by it due south.  All that day he went, and
found no more change in that huge neck, save that whiles it was more and
whiles less steep.  A little before nightfall he happened on a shallow
pool some twenty yards over; and he deemed it good to rest there, since
there was water for his avail, though he might have made somewhat more
out of the tail end of the day.

When dawn came again he awoke and arose, nor spent much time over his
breakfast; but pressed on all he might; and now he said to himself, that
whatsoever other peril were athwart his way, he was out of the danger of
the chase of his own folk.

All this while he had seen no four-footed beast, save now and again a
hill-fox, and once some outlandish kind of hare; and of fowl but very
few: a crow or two, a long-winged hawk, and twice an eagle high up aloft.

Again, the third night, he slept in the stony wilderness, which still led
him up and up.  Only toward the end of the day, himseemed that it had
been less steep for a long while: otherwise nought was changed, on all
sides it was nought but the endless neck, wherefrom nought could be seen,
but some other part of itself.  This fourth night withal he found no
water whereby he might rest, so that he awoke parched, and longing to
drink just when the dawn was at its coldest.

But on the fifth morrow the ground rose but little, and at last, when he
had been going wearily a long while, and now, hard on noontide, his
thirst grieved him sorely, he came on a spring welling out from under a
high rock, the water wherefrom trickled feebly away.  So eager was he to
drink, that at first he heeded nought else; but when his thirst was fully
quenched his eyes caught sight of the stream which flowed from the well,
and he gave a shout, for lo! it was running south.  Wherefore it was with
a merry heart that he went on, and as he went, came on more streams, all
running south or thereabouts.  He hastened on all he might, but in
despite of all the speed he made, and that he felt the land now going
down southward, night overtook him in that same wilderness.  Yet when he
stayed at last for sheer weariness, he lay down in what he deemed by the
moonlight to be a shallow valley, with a ridge at the southern end
thereof.

He slept long, and when he awoke the sun was high in the heavens, and
never was brighter or clearer morning on the earth than was that.  He
arose and ate of what little was yet left him, and drank of the water of
a stream which he had followed the evening before, and beside which he
had laid him down; and then set forth again with no great hope to come on
new tidings that day.  But yet when he was fairly afoot, himseemed that
there was something new in the air which he breathed, that was soft and
bore sweet scents home to him; whereas heretofore, and that especially
for the last three or four days, it had been harsh and void, like the
face of the desert itself.

So on he went, and presently was mounting the ridge aforesaid, and, as
oft happens when one climbs a steep place, he kept his eyes on the
ground, till he felt he was on the top of the ridge.  Then he stopped to
take breath, and raised his head and looked, and lo! he was verily on the
brow of the great mountain-neck, and down below him was the hanging of
the great hill-slopes, which fell down, not slowly, as those he had been
those days a-mounting, but speedily enough, though with little of broken
places or sheer cliffs.  But beyond this last of the desert there was
before him a lovely land of wooded hills, green plains, and little
valleys, stretching out far and wide, till it ended at last in great blue
mountains and white snowy peaks beyond them.

Then for very surprise of joy his spirit wavered, and he felt faint and
dizzy, so that he was fain to sit down a while and cover his face with
his hands.  Presently he came to his sober mind again, and stood up and
looked forth keenly, and saw no sign of any dwelling of man.  But he said
to himself that that might well be because the good and well-grassed land
was still so far off, and that he might yet look to find men and their
dwellings when he had left the mountain wilderness quite behind him: So
therewith he fell to going his ways down the mountain, and lost little
time therein, whereas he now had his livelihood to look to.




CHAPTER IX: WALTER HAPPENETH ON THE FIRST OF THOSE THREE CREATURES


What with one thing, what with another, as his having to turn out of his
way for sheer rocks, or for slopes so steep that he might not try the
peril of them, and again for bogs impassable, he was fully three days
more before he had quite come out of the stony waste, and by that time,
though he had never lacked water, his scanty victual was quite done, for
all his careful husbandry thereof.  But this troubled him little, whereas
he looked to find wild fruits here and there and to shoot some small
deer, as hare or coney, and make a shift to cook the same, since he had
with him flint and fire-steel.  Moreover the further he went, the surer
he was that he should soon come across a dwelling, so smooth and fair as
everything looked before him.  And he had scant fear, save that he might
happen on men who should enthrall him.

But when he was come down past the first green slopes, he was so worn,
that he said to himself that rest was better than meat, so little as he
had slept for the last three days; so he laid him down under an ash-tree
by a stream-side, nor asked what was o'clock, but had his fill of sleep,
and even when he awoke in the fresh morning was little fain of rising,
but lay betwixt sleeping and waking for some three hours more; then he
arose, and went further down the next green bent, yet somewhat slowly
because of his hunger-weakness.  And the scent of that fair land came up
to him like the odour of one great nosegay.

So he came to where the land was level, and there were many trees, as oak
and ash, and sweet-chestnut and wych-elm, and hornbeam and quicken-tree,
not growing in a close wood or tangled thicket, but set as though in
order on the flowery greensward, even as it might be in a great king's
park.

So came he to a big bird-cherry, whereof many boughs hung low down laden
with fruit: his belly rejoiced at the sight, and he caught hold of a
bough, and fell to plucking and eating.  But whiles he was amidst of
this, he heard suddenly, close anigh him, a strange noise of roaring and
braying, not very great, but exceeding fierce and terrible, and not like
to the voice of any beast that he knew.  As has been aforesaid, Walter
was no faint-heart; but what with the weakness of his travail and hunger,
what with the strangeness of his adventure and his loneliness, his spirit
failed him; he turned round towards the noise, his knees shook and he
trembled: this way and that he looked, and then gave a great cry and
tumbled down in a swoon; for close before him, at his very feet, was the
dwarf whose image he had seen before, clad in his yellow coat, and
grinning up at him from his hideous hairy countenance.

How long he lay there as one dead, he knew not, but when he woke again
there was the dwarf sitting on his hams close by him.  And when he lifted
up his head, the dwarf sent out that fearful harsh voice again; but this
time Walter could make out words therein, and knew that the creature
spoke and said:

"How now!  What art thou?  Whence comest?  What wantest?"

Walter sat up and said: "I am a man; I hight Golden Walter; I come from
Langton; I want victual."

Said the dwarf, writhing his face grievously, and laughing forsooth: "I
know it all: I asked thee to see what wise thou wouldst lie.  I was sent
forth to look for thee; and I have brought thee loathsome bread with me,
such as ye aliens must needs eat: take it!"

Therewith he drew a loaf from a satchel which he bore, and thrust it
towards Walter, who took it somewhat doubtfully for all his hunger.

The dwarf yelled at him: "Art thou dainty, alien?  Wouldst thou have
flesh?  Well, give me thy bow and an arrow or two, since thou art lazy-
sick, and I will get thee a coney or a hare, or a quail maybe.  Ah, I
forgot; thou art dainty, and wilt not eat flesh as I do, blood and all
together, but must needs half burn it in the fire, or mar it with hot
water; as they say my Lady does: or as the Wretch, the Thing does; I know
that, for I have seen It eating."

"Nay," said Walter, "this sufficeth;" and he fell to eating the bread,
which was sweet between his teeth.  Then when he had eaten a while, for
hunger compelled him, he said to the dwarf: "But what meanest thou by the
Wretch and the Thing?  And what Lady is thy Lady?"

The creature let out another wordless roar as of furious anger; and then
the words came: "It hath a face white and red, like to thine; and hands
white as thine, yea, but whiter; and the like it is underneath its
raiment, only whiter still: for I have seen It--yes, I have seen It; ah
yes and yes and yes."

And therewith his words ran into gibber and yelling, and he rolled about
and smote at the grass: but in a while he grew quiet again and sat still,
and then fell to laughing horribly again, and then said: "But thou, fool,
wilt think It fair if thou fallest into Its hands, and wilt repent it
thereafter, as I did.  Oh, the mocking and gibes of It, and the tears and
shrieks of It; and the knife!  What! sayest thou of my Lady?--What Lady?
O alien, what other Lady is there?  And what shall I tell thee of her? it
is like that she made me, as she made the Bear men.  But she made not the
Wretch, the Thing; and she hateth It sorely, as I do.  And some day to
come--"

Thereat he brake off and fell to wordless yelling a long while, and
thereafter spake all panting: "Now I have told thee overmuch, and O if my
Lady come to hear thereof.  Now I will go."

And therewith he took out two more loaves from his wallet, and tossed
them to Walter, and so turned and went his ways; whiles walking upright,
as Walter had seen his image on the quay of Langton; whiles bounding and
rolling like a ball thrown by a lad; whiles scuttling along on all-fours
like an evil beast, and ever and anon giving forth that harsh and evil
cry.

Walter sat a while after he was out of sight, so stricken with horror and
loathing and a fear of he knew not what, that he might not move.  Then he
plucked up a heart, and looked to his weapons and put the other loaves
into his scrip.

Then he arose and went his ways wondering, yea and dreading, what kind of
creature he should next fall in with.  For soothly it seemed to him that
it would be worse than death if they were all such as this one; and that
if it were so, he must needs slay and be slain.




CHAPTER X: WALTER HAPPENETH ON ANOTHER CREATURE IN THE STRANGE LAND


But as he went on through the fair and sweet land so bright and
sun-litten, and he now rested and fed, the horror and fear ran off from
him, and he wandered on merrily, neither did aught befall him save the
coming of night, when he laid him down under a great spreading oak with
his drawn sword ready to hand, and fell asleep at once, and woke not till
the sun was high.

Then he arose and went on his way again; and the land was no worser than
yesterday; but even better, it might be; the greensward more flowery, the
oaks and chestnuts greater.  Deer of diverse kinds he saw, and might
easily have got his meat thereof; but he meddled not with them since he
had his bread, and was timorous of lighting a fire.  Withal he doubted
little of having some entertainment; and that, might be, nought evil;
since even that fearful dwarf had been courteous to him after his kind,
and had done him good and not harm.  But of the happening on the Wretch
and the Thing, whereof the dwarf spake, he was yet somewhat afeard.

After he had gone a while and whenas the summer morn was at its
brightest, he saw a little way ahead a grey rock rising up from amidst of
a ring of oak-trees; so he turned thither straightway; for in this plain-
land he had seen no rocks heretofore; and as he went he saw that there
was a fountain gushing out from under the rock, which ran thence in a
fair little stream.  And when he had the rock and the fountain and the
stream clear before him, lo! a child of Adam sitting beside the fountain
under the shadow of the rock.  He drew a little nigher, and then he saw
that it was a woman, clad in green like the sward whereon she lay.  She
was playing with the welling out of the water, and she had trussed up her
sleeves to the shoulder that she might thrust her bare arms therein.  Her
shoes of black leather lay on the grass beside her, and her feet and legs
yet shone with the brook.

Belike amidst the splashing and clatter of the water she did not hear him
drawing nigh, so that he was close to her before she lifted up her face
and saw him, and he beheld her, that it was the maiden of the thrice-seen
pageant.  She reddened when she saw him, and hastily covered up her legs
with her gown-skirt, and drew down the sleeves over her arms, but
otherwise stirred not.  As for him, he stood still, striving to speak to
her; but no word might he bring out, and his heart beat sorely.

But the maiden spake to him in a clear sweet voice, wherein was now no
trouble: "Thou art an alien, art thou not?  For I have not seen thee
before."

"Yea," he said, "I am an alien; wilt thou be good to me?"

She said: "And why not?  I was afraid at first, for I thought it had been
the King's Son.  I looked to see none other; for of goodly men he has
been the only one here in the land this long while, till thy coming."

He said: "Didst thou look for my coming at about this time?"

"O nay," she said; "how might I?"

Said Walter: "I wot not; but the other man seemed to be looking for me,
and knew of me, and he brought me bread to eat."

She looked on him anxiously, and grew somewhat pale, as she said: "What
other one?"

Now Walter did not know what the dwarf might be to her, fellow-servant or
what not, so he would not show his loathing of him; but answered wisely:
"The little man in the yellow raiment."

But when she heard that word, she went suddenly very pale, and leaned her
head aback, and beat the air with her hands; but said presently in a
faint voice: "I pray thee talk not of that one while I am by, nor even
think of him, if thou mayest forbear."

He spake not, and she was a little while before she came to herself
again; then she opened her eyes, and looked upon Walter and smiled kindly
on him, as though to ask his pardon for having scared him.  Then she rose
up in her place, and stood before him; and they were nigh together, for
the stream betwixt them was little.

But he still looked anxiously upon her and said: "Have I hurt thee?  I
pray thy pardon."

She looked on him more sweetly still, and said: "O nay; thou wouldst not
hurt me, thou!"

Then she blushed very red, and he in like wise; but afterwards she turned
pale, and laid a hand on her breast, and Walter cried out hastily: "O me!
I have hurt thee again.  Wherein have I done amiss?"

"In nought, in nought," she said; "but I am troubled, I wot not
wherefore; some thought hath taken hold of me, and I know it not.
Mayhappen in a little while I shall know what troubles me.  Now I bid
thee depart from me a little, and I will abide here; and when thou comest
back, it will either be that I have found it out or not; and in either
case I will tell thee."

She spoke earnestly to him; but he said: "How long shall I abide away?"

Her face was troubled as she answered him: "For no long while."

He smiled on her and turned away, and went a space to the other side of
the oak-trees, whence she was still within eyeshot.  There he abode until
the time seemed long to him; but he schooled himself and forbore; for he
said: Lest she send me away again.  So he abided until again the time
seemed long to him, and she called not to him: but once again he forbore
to go; then at last he arose, and his heart beat and he trembled, and he
walked back again speedily, and came to the maiden, who was still
standing by the rock of the spring, her arms hanging down, her eyes
downcast.  She looked up at him as he drew nigh, and her face changed
with eagerness as she said: "I am glad thou art come back, though it be
no long while since thy departure" (sooth to say it was scarce half an
hour in all).  "Nevertheless I have been thinking many things, and
thereof will I now tell thee."

He said: "Maiden, there is a river betwixt us, though it be no big one.
Shall I not stride over, and come to thee, that we may sit down together
side by side on the green grass?"

"Nay," she said, "not yet; tarry a while till I have told thee of
matters.  I must now tell thee of my thoughts in order."

Her colour went and came now, and she plaited the folds of her gown with
restless fingers.  At last she said: "Now the first thing is this; that
though thou hast seen me first only within this hour, thou hast set thine
heart upon me to have me for thy speech-friend and thy darling.  And if
this be not so, then is all my speech, yea and all my hope, come to an
end at once."

"O yea!" said Walter, "even so it is: but how thou hast found this out I
wot not; since now for the first time I say it, that thou art indeed my
love, and my dear and my darling."

"Hush," she said, "hush! lest the wood have ears, and thy speech is loud:
abide, and I shall tell thee how I know it.  Whether this thy love shall
outlast the first time that thou holdest my body in thine arms, I wot
not, nor dost thou.  But sore is my hope that it may be so; for I also,
though it be but scarce an hour since I set eyes on thee, have cast mine
eyes on thee to have thee for my love and my darling, and my
speech-friend.  And this is how I wot that thou lovest me, my friend.  Now
is all this dear and joyful, and overflows my heart with sweetness.  But
now must I tell thee of the fear and the evil which lieth behind it."

Then Walter stretched out his hands to her, and cried out: "Yea, yea!  But
whatever evil entangle us, now we both know these two things, to wit,
that thou lovest me, and I thee, wilt thou not come hither, that I may
cast mine arms about thee, and kiss thee, if not thy kind lips or thy
friendly face at all, yet at least thy dear hand: yea, that I may touch
thy body in some wise?"

She looked on him steadily, and said softly: "Nay, this above all things
must not be; and that it may not be is a part of the evil which entangles
us.  But hearken, friend, once again I tell thee that thy voice is over
loud in this wilderness fruitful of evil.  Now I have told thee, indeed,
of two things whereof we both wot; but next I must needs tell thee of
things whereof I wot, and thou wottest not.  Yet this were better, that
thou pledge thy word not to touch so much as one of my hands, and that we
go together a little way hence away from these tumbled stones, and sit
down upon the open greensward; whereas here is cover if there be spying
abroad."

Again, as she spoke, she turned very pale; but Walter said: "Since it
must be so, I pledge thee my word to thee as I love thee."

And therewith she knelt down, and did on her foot-gear, and then sprang
lightly over the rivulet; and then the twain of them went side by side
some half a furlong thence, and sat down, shadowed by the boughs of a
slim quicken-tree growing up out of the greensward, whereon for a good
space around was neither bush nor brake.

There began the maiden to talk soberly, and said: "This is what I must
needs say to thee now, that thou art come into a land perilous for any
one that loveth aught of good; from which, forsooth, I were fain that
thou wert gotten away safely, even though I should die of longing for
thee.  As for myself, my peril is, in a measure, less than thine; I mean
the peril of death.  But lo, thou, this iron on my foot is token that I
am a thrall, and thou knowest in what wise thralls must pay for
transgressions.  Furthermore, of what I am, and how I came hither, time
would fail me to tell; but somewhile, maybe, I shall tell thee.  I serve
an evil mistress, of whom I may say that scarce I wot if she be a woman
or not; but by some creatures is she accounted for a god, and as a god is
heried; and surely never god was crueller nor colder than she.  Me she
hateth sorely; yet if she hated me little or nought, small were the gain
to me if it were her pleasure to deal hardly by me.  But as things now
are, and are like to be, it would not be for her pleasure, but for her
pain and loss, to make an end of me, therefore, as I said e'en now, my
mere life is not in peril with her; unless, perchance, some sudden
passion get the better of her, and she slay me, and repent of it
thereafter.  For so it is, that if it be the least evil of her conditions
that she is wanton, at least wanton she is to the letter.  Many a time
hath she cast the net for the catching of some goodly young man; and her
latest prey (save it be thou) is the young man whom I named, when first I
saw thee, by the name of the King's Son.  He is with us yet, and I fear
him; for of late hath he wearied of her, though it is but plain truth to
say of her, that she is the wonder of all Beauties of the World.  He hath
wearied of her, I say, and hath cast his eyes upon me, and if I were
heedless, he would betray me to the uttermost of the wrath of my
mistress.  For needs must I say of him, though he be a goodly man, and
now fallen into thralldom, that he hath no bowels of compassion; but is a
dastard, who for an hour's pleasure would undo me, and thereafter would
stand by smiling and taking my mistress's pardon with good cheer, while
for me would be no pardon.  Seest thou, therefore, how it is with me
between these two cruel fools?  And moreover there are others of whom I
will not even speak to thee."

And therewith she put her hands before her face, and wept, and murmured:
"Who shall deliver me from this death in life?"

But Walter cried out: "For what else am I come hither, I, I?"

And it was a near thing that he did not take her in his arms, but he
remembered his pledged word, and drew aback from her in terror, whereas
he had an inkling of why she would not suffer it; and he wept with her.

But suddenly the Maid left weeping, and said in a changed voice: "Friend,
whereas thou speakest of delivering me, it is more like that I shall
deliver thee.  And now I pray thy pardon for thus grieving thee with my
grief, and that more especially because thou mayst not solace thy grief
with kisses and caresses; but so it was, that for once I was smitten by
the thought of the anguish of this land, and the joy of all the world
besides."

Therewith she caught her breath in a half-sob, but refrained her and went
on: "Now dear friend and darling, take good heed to all that I shall say
to thee, whereas thou must do after the teaching of my words.  And first,
I deem by the monster having met thee at the gates of the land, and
refreshed thee, that the Mistress hath looked for thy coming; nay, by thy
coming hither at all, that she hath cast her net and caught thee.  Hast
thou noted aught that might seem to make this more like?"

Said Walter: "Three times in full daylight have I seen go past me the
images of the monster and thee and a glorious lady, even as if ye were
alive."

And therewith he told her in few words how it had gone with him since
that day on the quay at Langton.

She said: "Then it is no longer perhaps, but certain, that thou art her
latest catch; and even so I deemed from the first: and, dear friend, this
is why I have not suffered thee to kiss or caress me, so sore as I longed
for thee.  For the Mistress will have thee for her only, and hath lured
thee hither for nought else; and she is wise in wizardry (even as some
deal am I), and wert thou to touch me with hand or mouth on my naked
flesh, yea, or were it even my raiment, then would she scent the savour
of thy love upon me, and then, though it may be she would spare thee, she
would not spare me."

Then was she silent a little, and seemed very downcast, and Walter held
his peace from grief and confusion and helplessness; for of wizardry he
knew nought.

At last the Maid spake again, and said: "Nevertheless we will not die
redeless.  Now thou must look to this, that from henceforward it is thee,
and not the King's Son, whom she desireth, and that so much the more that
she hath not set eyes on thee.  Remember this, whatsoever her seeming may
be to thee.  Now, therefore, shall the King's Son be free, though he know
it not, to cast his love on whomso he will; and, in a way, I also shall
be free to yeasay him.  Though, forsooth, so fulfilled is she with malice
and spite, that even then she may turn round on me to punish me for doing
that which she would have me do.  Now let me think of it."

Then was she silent a good while, and spoke at last: "Yea, all things are
perilous, and a perilous rede I have thought of, whereof I will not tell
thee as yet; so waste not the short while by asking me.  At least the
worst will be no worse than what shall come if we strive not against it.
And now, my friend, amongst perils it is growing more and more perilous
that we twain should be longer together.  But I would say one thing yet;
and maybe another thereafter.  Thou hast cast thy love upon one who will
be true to thee, whatsoever may befall; yet is she a guileful creature,
and might not help it her life long, and now for thy very sake must needs
be more guileful now than ever before.  And as for me, the guileful, my
love have I cast upon a lovely man, and one true and simple, and a stout-
heart; but at such a pinch is he, that if he withstand all temptation,
his withstanding may belike undo both him and me.  Therefore swear we
both of us, that by both of us shall all guile and all falling away be
forgiven on the day when we shall be free to love each the other as our
hearts will."

Walter cried out: "O love, I swear it indeed! thou art my Hallow, and I
will swear it as on the relics of a Hallow; on thy hands and thy feet I
swear it."

The words seemed to her a dear caress; and she laughed, and blushed, and
looked full kindly on him; and then her face grew solemn, and she said:
"On thy life I swear it!"

Then she said: "Now is there nought for thee to do but to go hence
straight to the Golden House, which is my Mistress's house, and the only
house in this land (save one which I may not see), and lieth southward no
long way.  How she will deal with thee, I wot not; but all I have said of
her and thee and the King's Son is true.  Therefore I say to thee, be
wary and cold at heart, whatsoever outward semblance thou mayst make.  If
thou have to yield thee to her, then yield rather late than early, so as
to gain time.  Yet not so late as to seem shamed in yielding for fear's
sake.  Hold fast to thy life, my friend, for in warding that, thou
wardest me from grief without remedy.  Thou wilt see me ere long; it may
be to-morrow, it may be some days hence.  But forget not, that what I may
do, that I am doing.  Take heed also that thou pay no more heed to me, or
rather less, than if thou wert meeting a maiden of no account in the
streets of thine own town.  O my love! barren is this first farewell, as
was our first meeting; but surely shall there be another meeting better
than the first, and the last farewell may be long and long yet."

Therewith she stood up, and he knelt before her a little while without
any word, and then arose and went his ways; but when he had gone a space
he turned about, and saw her still standing in the same place; she stayed
a moment when she saw him turn, and then herself turned about.

So he departed through the fair land, and his heart was full with hope
and fear as he went.




CHAPTER XI: WALTER HAPPENETH ON THE MISTRESS


It was but a little after noon when Walter left the Maid behind: he
steered south by the sun, as the Maid had bidden him, and went swiftly;
for, as a good knight wending to battle, the time seemed long to him till
he should meet the foe.

So an hour before sunset he saw something white and gay gleaming through
the boles of the oak-trees, and presently there was clear before him a
most goodly house builded of white marble, carved all about with knots
and imagery, and the carven folk were all painted of their lively
colours, whether it were their raiment or their flesh, and the housings
wherein they stood all done with gold and fair hues.  Gay were the
windows of the house; and there was a pillared porch before the great
door, with images betwixt the pillars both of men and beasts: and when
Walter looked up to the roof of the house, he saw that it gleamed and
shone; for all the tiles were of yellow metal, which he deemed to be of
very gold.

All this he saw as he went, and tarried not to gaze upon it; for he said,
Belike there will be time for me to look on all this before I die.  But
he said also, that, though the house was not of the greatest, it was
beyond compare of all houses of the world.

Now he entered it by the porch, and came into a hall many-pillared, and
vaulted over, the walls painted with gold and ultramarine, the floor
dark, and spangled with many colours, and the windows glazed with knots
and pictures.  Midmost thereof was a fountain of gold, whence the water
ran two ways in gold-lined runnels, spanned twice with little bridges of
silver.  Long was that hall, and now not very light, so that Walter was
come past the fountain before he saw any folk therein: then he looked up
toward the high-seat, and himseemed that a great light shone thence, and
dazzled his eyes; and he went on a little way, and then fell on his
knees; for there before him on the high-seat sat that wondrous Lady,
whose lively image had been shown to him thrice before; and she was clad
in gold and jewels, as he had erst seen her.  But now she was not alone;
for by her side sat a young man, goodly enough, so far as Walter might
see him, and most richly clad, with a jewelled sword by his side, and a
chaplet of gems on his head.  They held each other by the hand, and
seemed to be in dear converse together; but they spake softly, so that
Walter might not hear what they said, till at last the man spake aloud to
the Lady: "Seest thou not that there is a man in the hall?"

"Yea," she said, "I see him yonder, kneeling on his knees; let him come
nigher and give some account of himself."

So Walter stood up and drew nigh, and stood there, all shamefaced and
confused, looking on those twain, and wondering at the beauty of the
Lady.  As for the man, who was slim, and black-haired, and
straight-featured, for all his goodliness Walter accounted him little,
and nowise deemed him to look chieftain-like.

Now the Lady spake not to Walter any more than erst; but at last the man
said: "Why doest thou not kneel as thou didst erewhile?"

Walter was on the point of giving him back a fierce answer; but the Lady
spake and said: "Nay, friend, it matters not whether he kneel or stand;
but he may say, if he will, what he would have of me, and wherefore he is
come hither."

Then spake Walter, for as wroth and ashamed as he was: "Lady, I have
strayed into this land, and have come to thine house as I suppose, and if
I be not welcome, I may well depart straightway, and seek a way out of
thy land, if thou wouldst drive me thence, as well as out of thine
house."

Thereat the Lady turned and looked on him, and when her eyes met his, he
felt a pang of fear and desire mingled shoot through his heart.  This
time she spoke to him; but coldly, without either wrath or any thought of
him: "Newcomer," she said, "I have not bidden thee hither; but here mayst
thou abide a while if thou wilt; nevertheless, take heed that here is no
King's Court.  There is, forsooth, a folk that serveth me (or, it may be,
more than one), of whom thou wert best to know nought.  Of others I have
but two servants, whom thou wilt see; and the one is a strange creature,
who should scare thee or scathe thee with a good will, but of a good will
shall serve nought save me; the other is a woman, a thrall, of little
avail, save that, being compelled, she will work woman's service for me,
but whom none else shall compel . . . Yea, but what is all this to thee;
or to me that I should tell it to thee?  I will not drive thee away; but
if thine entertainment please thee not, make no plaint thereof to me, but
depart at thy will.  Now is this talk betwixt us overlong, since, as thou
seest, I and this King's Son are in converse together.  Art thou a King's
Son?"

"Nay, Lady," said Walter, "I am but of the sons of the merchants."

"It matters not," she said; "go thy ways into one of the chambers."

And straightway she fell a-talking to the man who sat beside her
concerning the singing of the birds beneath her window in the morning;
and of how she had bathed her that day in a pool of the woodlands, when
she had been heated with hunting, and so forth; and all as if there had
been none there save her and the King's Son.

But Walter departed all ashamed, as though he had been a poor man thrust
away from a rich kinsman's door; and he said to himself that this woman
was hateful, and nought love-worthy, and that she was little like to
tempt him, despite all the fairness of her body.

No one else he saw in the house that even; he found meat and drink duly
served on a fair table, and thereafter he came on a goodly bed, and all
things needful, but no child of Adam to do him service, or bid him
welcome or warning.  Nevertheless he ate, and drank, and slept, and put
off thought of all these things till the morrow, all the more as he hoped
to see the kind maiden some time betwixt sunrise and sunset on that new
day.




CHAPTER XII: THE WEARING OF FOUR DAYS IN THE WOOD BEYOND THE WORLD


He arose betimes, but found no one to greet him, neither was there any
sound of folk moving within the fair house; so he but broke his fast, and
then went forth and wandered amongst the trees, till he found him a
stream to bathe in, and after he had washed the night off him he lay down
under a tree thereby for a while, but soon turned back toward the house,
lest perchance the Maid should come thither and he should miss her.

It should be said that half a bow-shot from the house on that side (i.e.
due north thereof) was a little hazel-brake, and round about it the trees
were smaller of kind than the oaks and chestnuts he had passed through
before, being mostly of birch and quicken-beam and young ash, with small
wood betwixt them; so now he passed through the thicket, and, coming to
the edge thereof, beheld the Lady and the King's Son walking together
hand in hand, full lovingly by seeming.

He deemed it unmeet to draw back and hide him, so he went forth past them
toward the house.  The King's Son scowled on him as he passed, but the
Lady, over whose beauteous face flickered the joyous morning smiles, took
no more heed of him than if he had been one of the trees of the wood.  But
she had been so high and disdainful with him the evening before, that he
thought little of that.  The twain went on, skirting the hazel-copse, and
he could not choose but turn his eyes on them, so sorely did the Lady's
beauty draw them.  Then befell another thing; for behind them the boughs
of the hazels parted, and there stood that little evil thing, he or
another of his kind; for he was quite unclad, save by his fell of yellowy-
brown hair, and that he was girt with a leathern girdle, wherein was
stuck an ugly two-edged knife: he stood upright a moment, and cast his
eyes at Walter and grinned, but not as if he knew him; and scarce could
Walter say whether it were the one he had seen, or another: then he cast
himself down on his belly, and fell to creeping through the long grass
like a serpent, following the footsteps of the Lady and her lover; and
now, as he crept, Walter deemed, in his loathing, that the creature was
liker to a ferret than aught else.  He crept on marvellous swiftly, and
was soon clean out of sight.  But Walter stood staring after him for a
while, and then lay down by the copse-side, that he might watch the house
and the entry thereof; for he thought, now perchance presently will the
kind maiden come hither to comfort me with a word or two.  But hour
passed by hour, and still she came not; and still he lay there, and
thought of the Maid, and longed for her kindness and wisdom, till he
could not refrain his tears, and wept for the lack of her.  Then he
arose, and went and sat in the porch, and was very downcast of mood.

But as he sat there, back comes the Lady again, the King's Son leading
her by the hand; they entered the porch, and she passed by him so close
that the odour of her raiment filled all the air about him, and the
sleekness of her side nigh touched him, so that he could not fail to note
that her garments were somewhat disarrayed, and that she kept her right
hand (for her left the King's Son held) to her bosom to hold the cloth
together there, whereas the rich raiment had been torn off from her right
shoulder.  As they passed by him, the King's Son once more scowled on
him, wordless, but even more fiercely than before; and again the Lady
heeded him nought.

After they had gone on a while, he entered the hall, and found it empty
from end to end, and no sound in it save the tinkling of the fountain;
but there was victual set on the board.  He ate and drank thereof to keep
life lusty within him, and then went out again to the wood-side to watch
and to long; and the time hung heavy on his hands because of the lack of
the fair Maiden.

He was of mind not to go into the house to his rest that night, but to
sleep under the boughs of the forest.  But a little after sunset he saw a
bright-clad image moving amidst the carven images of the porch, and the
King's Son came forth and went straight to him, and said: "Thou art to
enter the house, and go into thy chamber forthwith, and by no means to go
forth of it betwixt sunset and sunrise.  My Lady will not away with thy
prowling round the house in the night-tide."

Therewith he turned away, and went into the house again; and Walter
followed him soberly, remembering how the Maid had bidden him forbear.  So
he went to his chamber, and slept.

But amidst of the night he awoke and deemed that he heard a voice not far
off, so he crept out of his bed and peered around, lest, perchance, the
Maid had come to speak with him; but his chamber was dusk and empty: then
he went to the window and looked out, and saw the moon shining bright and
white upon the greensward.  And lo! the Lady walking with the King's Son,
and he clad in thin and wanton raiment, but she in nought else save what
God had given her of long, crispy yellow hair.  Then was Walter ashamed
to look on her, seeing that there was a man with her, and gat him back to
his bed; but yet a long while ere he slept again he had the image before
his eyes of the fair woman on the dewy moonlit grass.

The next day matters went much the same way, and the next also, save that
his sorrow was increased, and he sickened sorely of hope deferred.  On
the fourth day also the forenoon wore as erst; but in the heat of the
afternoon Walter sought to the hazel-copse, and laid him down there hard
by a little clearing thereof, and slept from very weariness of grief.
There, after a while, he woke with words still hanging in his ears, and
he knew at once that it was they twain talking together.

The King's Son had just done his say, and now it was the Lady beginning
in her honey-sweet voice, low but strong, wherein even was a little of
huskiness; she said: "Otto, belike it were well to have a little
patience, till we find out what the man is, and whence he cometh; it will
always be easy to rid us of him; it is but a word to our Dwarf-king, and
it will be done in a few minutes."

"Patience!" said the King's Son, angrily; "I wot not how to have patience
with him; for I can see of him that he is rude and violent and
headstrong, and a low-born wily one.  Forsooth, he had patience enough
with me the other even, when I rated him in, like the dog that he is, and
he had no manhood to say one word to me.  Soothly, as he followed after
me, I had a mind to turn about and deal him a buffet on the face, to see
if I could but draw one angry word from him."

The Lady laughed, and said: "Well, Otto, I know not; that which thou
deemest dastardy in him may be but prudence and wisdom, and he an alien,
far from his friends and nigh to his foes.  Perchance we shall yet try
him what he is.  Meanwhile, I rede thee try him not with buffets, save he
be weaponless and with bounden hands; or else I deem that but a little
while shalt thou be fain of thy blow."

Now when Walter heard her words and the voice wherein they were said, he
might not forbear being stirred by them, and to him, all lonely there,
they seemed friendly.

But he lay still, and the King's Son answered the Lady and said: "I know
not what is in thine heart concerning this runagate, that thou shouldst
bemock me with his valiancy, whereof thou knowest nought.  If thou deem
me unworthy of thee, send me back safe to my father's country; I may look
to have worship there; yea, and the love of fair women belike."

Therewith it seemed as if he had put forth his hand to the Lady to caress
her, for she said: "Nay, lay not thine hand on my shoulder, for to-day
and now it is not the hand of love, but of pride and folly, and would-be
mastery.  Nay, neither shalt thou rise up and leave me until thy mood is
softer and kinder to me."

Then was there silence betwixt them a while, and thereafter the King's
Son spake in a wheedling voice: "My goddess, I pray thee pardon me!  But
canst thou wonder that I fear thy wearying of me, and am therefore
peevish and jealous? thou so far above the Queens of the World, and I a
poor youth that without thee were nothing!"

She answered nought, and he went on again: "Was it not so, O goddess,
that this man of the sons of the merchants was little heedful of thee,
and thy loveliness and thy majesty?"

She laughed and said: "Maybe he deemed not that he had much to gain of
us, seeing thee sitting by our side, and whereas we spake to him coldly
and sternly and disdainfully.  Withal, the poor youth was dazzled and
shamefaced before us; that we could see in the eyes and the mien of him."

Now this she spoke so kindly and sweetly, that again was Walter all
stirred thereat; and it came into his mind that it might be she knew he
was anigh and hearing her, and that she spake as much for him as for the
King's Son: but that one answered: "Lady, didst thou not see somewhat
else in his eyes, to wit, that they had but of late looked on some fair
woman other than thee?  As for me, I deem it not so unlike that on the
way to thine hall he may have fallen in with thy Maid."

He spoke in a faltering voice, as if shrinking from some storm that might
come.  And forsooth the Lady's voice was changed as she answered, though
there was no outward heat in it; rather it was sharp and eager and cold
at once.  She said: "Yea, that is not ill thought of; but we may not
always keep our thrall in mind.  If it be so as thou deemest, we shall
come to know it most like when we next fall in with her; or if she hath
been shy this time, then shall she pay the heavier for it; for we will
question her by the Fountain in the Hall as to what betid by the Fountain
of the Rock."

Spake the King's Son, faltering yet more: "Lady, were it not better to
question the man himself? the Maid is stout-hearted, and will not be
speedily quelled into a true tale; whereas the man I deem of no account."

"No, no," said the Lady sharply, "it shall not be."

Then was she silent a while; and then she said: "How if the man should
prove to be our master?"

"Nay, our Lady," said the King's Son, "thou art jesting with me; thou and
thy might and thy wisdom, and all that thy wisdom may command, to be over-
mastered by a gangrel churl!"

"But how if I will not have it command, King's Son?" said the Lady.  "I
tell thee I know thine heart, but thou knowest not mine.  But be at
peace!  For since thou hast prayed for this woman--nay, not with thy
words, I wot, but with thy trembling hands, and thine anxious eyes, and
knitted brow--I say, since thou hast prayed for her so earnestly, she
shall escape this time.  But whether it will be to her gain in the long
run, I misdoubt me.  See thou to that, Otto! thou who hast held me in
thine arms so oft.  And now thou mayest depart if thou wilt."

It seemed to Walter as if the King's Son were dumbfoundered at her words:
he answered nought, and presently he rose from the ground, and went his
ways slowly toward the house.  The Lady lay there a little while, and
then went her ways also; but turned away from the house toward the wood
at the other end thereof, whereby Walter had first come thither.

As for Walter, he was confused in mind and shaken in spirit; and withal
he seemed to see guile and cruel deeds under the talk of those two, and
waxed wrathful thereat.  Yet he said to himself, that nought might he do,
but was as one bound hand and foot, till he had seen the Maid again.




CHAPTER XIII: NOW IS THE HUNT UP


Next morning was he up betimes, but he was cast down and heavy of heart,
not looking for aught else to betide than had betid those last four days.
But otherwise it fell out; for when he came down into the hall, there was
the lady sitting on the high-seat all alone, clad but in a coat of white
linen; and she turned her head when she heard his footsteps, and looked
on him, and greeted him, and said: "Come hither, guest."

So he went and stood before her, and she said: "Though as yet thou hast
had no welcome here, and no honour, it hath not entered into thine heart
to flee from us; and to say sooth, that is well for thee, for flee away
from our hand thou mightest not, nor mightest thou depart without our
furtherance.  But for this we can thee thank, that thou hast abided here
our bidding and eaten thine heart through the heavy wearing of four days,
and made no plaint.  Yet I cannot deem thee a dastard; thou so well knit
and shapely of body, so clear-eyed and bold of visage.  Wherefore now I
ask thee, art thou willing to do me service, thereby to earn thy
guesting?"

Walter answered her, somewhat faltering at first, for he was astonished
at the change which had come over her; for now she spoke to him in
friendly wise, though indeed as a great lady would speak to a young man
ready to serve her in all honour.  Said he: "Lady, I can thank thee
humbly and heartily in that thou biddest me do thee service; for these
days past I have loathed the emptiness of the hours, and nought better
could I ask for than to serve so glorious a Mistress in all honour."

She frowned somewhat, and said: "Thou shalt not call me Mistress; there
is but one who so calleth me, that is my thrall; and thou art none such.
Thou shalt call me Lady, and I shall be well pleased that thou be my
squire, and for this present thou shalt serve me in the hunting.  So get
thy gear; take thy bow and arrows, and gird thee to thy sword.  For in
this fair land may one find beasts more perilous than be buck or hart.  I
go now to array me; we will depart while the day is yet young; for so
make we the summer day the fairest."

He made obeisance to her, and she arose and went to her chamber, and
Walter dight himself, and then abode her in the porch; and in less than
an hour she came out of the hall, and Walter's heart beat when he saw
that the Maid followed her hard at heel, and scarce might he school his
eyes not to gaze over-eagerly at his dear friend.  She was clad even as
she was before, and was changed in no wise, save that love troubled her
face when she first beheld him, and she had much ado to master it:
howbeit the Mistress heeded not the trouble of her, or made no semblance
of heeding it, till the Maiden's face was all according to its wont.

But this Walter found strange, that after all that disdain of the Maid's
thralldom which he had heard of the Mistress, and after all the threats
against her, now was the Mistress become mild and debonaire to her, as a
good lady to her good maiden.  When Walter bowed the knee to her, she
turned unto the Maid, and said: "Look thou, my Maid, at this fair new
Squire that I have gotten!  Will not he be valiant in the greenwood?  And
see whether he be well shapen or not.  Doth he not touch thine heart,
when thou thinkest of all the woe, and fear, and trouble of the World
beyond the Wood, which he hath escaped, to dwell in this little land
peaceably, and well-beloved both by the Mistress and the Maid?  And thou,
my Squire, look a little at this fair slim Maiden, and say if she
pleaseth thee not: didst thou deem that we had any thing so fair in this
lonely place?"

Frank and kind was the smile on her radiant visage, nor did she seem to
note any whit the trouble on Walter's face, nor how he strove to keep his
eyes from the Maid.  As for her, she had so wholly mastered her
countenance, that belike she used her face guilefully, for she stood as
one humble but happy, with a smile on her face, blushing, and with her
head hung down as if shamefaced before a goodly young man, a stranger.

But the Lady looked upon her kindly and said: "Come hither, child, and
fear not this frank and free young man, who belike feareth thee a little,
and full certainly feareth me; and yet only after the manner of men."

And therewith she took the Maid by the hand and drew her to her, and
pressed her to her bosom, and kissed her cheeks and her lips, and undid
the lacing of her gown and bared a shoulder of her, and swept away her
skirt from her feet; and then turned to Walter and said: "Lo thou,
Squire! is not this a lovely thing to have grown up amongst our rough oak-
boles?  What! art thou looking at the iron ring there?  It is nought,
save a token that she is mine, and that I may not be without her."

Then she took the Maid by the shoulders and turned her about as in sport,
and said: "Go thou now, and bring hither the good grey ones; for needs
must we bring home some venison to-day, whereas this stout warrior may
not feed on nought save manchets and honey."

So the Maid went her way, taking care, as Walter deemed, to give no side
glance to him.  But he stood there shamefaced, so confused with all this
openhearted kindness of the great Lady and with the fresh sight of the
darling beauty of the Maid, that he went nigh to thinking that all he had
heard since he had come to the porch of the house that first time was but
a dream of evil.

But while he stood pondering these matters, and staring before him as one
mazed, the Lady laughed out in his face, and touched him on the arm and
said: "Ah, our Squire, is it so that now thou hast seen my Maid thou
wouldst with a good will abide behind to talk with her?  But call to mind
thy word pledged to me e'en now!  And moreover I tell thee this for thy
behoof now she is out of ear-shot, that I will above all things take thee
away to-day: for there be other eyes, and they nought uncomely, that look
at whiles on my fair-ankled thrall; and who knows but the swords might be
out if I take not the better heed, and give thee not every whit of thy
will."

As she spoke and moved forward, he turned a little, so that now the edge
of that hazel-coppice was within his eye-shot, and he deemed that once
more he saw the yellow-brown evil thing crawling forth from the thicket;
then, turning suddenly on the Lady, he met her eyes, and seemed in one
moment of time to find a far other look in them than that of frankness
and kindness; though in a flash they changed back again, and she said
merrily and sweetly: "So, so, Sir Squire, now art thou awake again, and
mayest for a little while look on me."

Now it came into his head, with that look of hers, all that might befall
him and the Maid if he mastered not his passion, nor did what he might to
dissemble; so he bent the knee to her, and spoke boldly to her in her own
vein, and said: "Nay, most gracious of ladies, never would I abide behind
to-day since thou farest afield.  But if my speech be hampered, or mine
eyes stray, is it not because my mind is confused by thy beauty, and the
honey of kind words which floweth from thy mouth?"

She laughed outright at his word, but not disdainfully, and said: "This
is well spoken, Squire, and even what a squire should say to his liege
lady, when the sun is up on a fair morning, and she and he and all the
world are glad."

She stood quite near him as she spoke, her hand was on his shoulder, and
her eyes shone and sparkled.  Sooth to say, that excusing of his
confusion was like enough in seeming to the truth; for sure never
creature was fashioned fairer than she: clad she was for the greenwood as
the hunting-goddess of the Gentiles, with her green gown gathered unto
her girdle, and sandals on her feet; a bow in her hand and a quiver at
her back: she was taller and bigger of fashion than the dear Maiden,
whiter of flesh, and more glorious, and brighter of hair; as a flower of
flowers for fairness and fragrance.

She said: "Thou art verily a fair squire before the hunt is up, and if
thou be as good in the hunting, all will be better than well, and the
guest will be welcome.  But lo! here cometh our Maid with the good grey
ones.  Go meet her, and we will tarry no longer than for thy taking the
leash in hand."

So Walter looked, and saw the Maid coming with two couple of great hounds
in the leash straining against her as she came along.  He ran lightly to
meet her, wondering if he should have a look, or a half-whisper from her;
but she let him take the white thongs from her hand, with the same half-
smile of shamefacedness still set on her face, and, going past him, came
softly up to the Lady, swaying like a willow-branch in the wind, and
stood before her, with her arms hanging down by her sides.  Then the Lady
turned to her, and said: "Look to thyself, our Maid, while we are away.
This fair young man thou needest not to fear indeed, for he is good and
leal; but what thou shalt do with the King's Son I wot not.  He is a hot
lover forsooth, but a hard man; and whiles evil is his mood, and perilous
both to thee and me.  And if thou do his will, it shall be ill for thee;
and if thou do it not, take heed of him, and let me, and me only, come
between his wrath and thee.  I may do somewhat for thee.  Even yesterday
he was instant with me to have thee chastised after the manner of
thralls; but I bade him keep silence of such words, and jeered him and
mocked him, till he went away from me peevish and in anger.  So look to
it that thou fall not into any trap of his contrivance."

Then the Maid cast herself at the Mistress's feet, and kissed and
embraced them; and as she rose up, the Lady laid her hand lightly on her
head, and then, turning to Walter, cried out: "Now, Squire, let us leave
all these troubles and wiles and desires behind us, and flit through the
merry greenwood like the Gentiles of old days."

And therewith she drew up the laps of her gown till the whiteness of her
knees was seen, and set off swiftly toward the wood that lay south of the
house, and Walter followed, marvelling at her goodliness; nor durst he
cast a look backward to the Maiden, for he knew that she desired him, and
it was her only that he looked to for his deliverance from this house of
guile and lies.




CHAPTER XIV: THE HUNTING OF THE HART


As they went, they found a change in the land, which grew emptier of big
and wide-spreading trees, and more beset with thickets.  From one of
these they roused a hart, and Walter let slip his hounds thereafter and
he and the Lady followed running.  Exceeding swift was she, and
well-breathed withal, so that Walter wondered at her; and eager she was
in the chase as the very hounds, heeding nothing the scratching of briars
or the whipping of stiff twigs as she sped on.  But for all their eager
hunting, the quarry outran both dogs and folk, and gat him into a great
thicket, amidmost whereof was a wide plash of water.  Into the thicket
they followed him, but he took to the water under their eyes and made
land on the other side; and because of the tangle of underwood, he swam
across much faster than they might have any hope to come round on him;
and so were the hunters left undone for that time.

So the Lady cast herself down on the green grass anigh the water, while
Walter blew the hounds in and coupled them up; then he turned round to
her, and lo! she was weeping for despite that they had lost the quarry;
and again did Walter wonder that so little a matter should raise a
passion of tears in her.  He durst not ask what ailed her, or proffer her
solace, but was not ill apaid by beholding her loveliness as she lay.

Presently she raised up her head and turned to Walter, and spake to him
angrily and said: "Squire, why dost thou stand staring at me like a
fool?"

"Yea, Lady," he said; "but the sight of thee maketh me foolish to do
aught else but to look on thee."

She said, in a peevish voice: "Tush, Squire, the day is too far spent for
soft and courtly speeches; what was good there is nought so good here.
Withal, I know more of thine heart than thou deemest."

Walter hung down his head and reddened, and she looked on him, and her
face changed, and she smiled and said, kindly this time: "Look ye,
Squire, I am hot and weary, and ill-content; but presently it will be
better with me; for my knees have been telling my shoulders that the cold
water of this little lake will be sweet and pleasant this summer noonday,
and that I shall forget my foil when I have taken my pleasure therein.
Wherefore, go thou with thine hounds without the thicket and there abide
my coming.  And I bid thee look not aback as thou goest, for therein were
peril to thee: I shall not keep thee tarrying long alone."

He bowed his head to her, and turned and went his ways.  And now, when he
was a little space away from her, he deemed her indeed a marvel of women,
and wellnigh forgat all his doubts and fears concerning her, whether she
were a fair image fashioned out of lies and guile, or it might be but an
evil thing in the shape of a goodly woman.  Forsooth, when he saw her
caressing the dear and friendly Maid, his heart all turned against her,
despite what his eyes and his ears told his mind, and she seemed like as
it were a serpent enfolding the simplicity of the body which he loved.

But now it was all changed, and he lay on the grass and longed for her
coming; which was delayed for somewhat more than an hour.  Then she came
back to him, smiling and fresh and cheerful, her green gown let down to
her heels.

He sprang up to meet her, and she came close to him, and spake from a
laughing face: "Squire, hast thou no meat in thy wallet?  For, meseemeth,
I fed thee when thou wert hungry the other day; do thou now the same by
me."

He smiled, and louted to her, and took his wallet and brought out thence
bread and flesh and wine, and spread them all out before her on the green
grass, and then stood by humbly before her.  But she said: "Nay, my
Squire, sit down by me and eat with me, for to-day are we both hunters
together."

So he sat down by her trembling, but neither for awe of her greatness,
nor for fear and horror of her guile and sorcery.

A while they sat there together after they had done their meat, and the
Lady fell a-talking with Walter concerning the parts of the earth, and
the manners of men, and of his journeyings to and fro.

At last she said: "Thou hast told me much and answered all my questions
wisely, and as my good Squire should, and that pleaseth me.  But now tell
me of the city wherein thou wert born and bred; a city whereof thou hast
hitherto told me nought."

"Lady," he said, "it is a fair and a great city, and to many it seemeth
lovely.  But I have left it, and now it is nothing to me."

"Hast thou not kindred there?" said she.

"Yea," said he, "and foemen withal; and a false woman waylayeth my life
there."

"And what was she?" said the Lady.

Said Walter: "She was but my wife."

"Was she fair?" said the Lady.

Walter looked on her a while, and then said: "I was going to say that she
was wellnigh as fair as thou; but that may scarce be.  Yet was she very
fair.  But now, kind and gracious Lady, I will say this word to thee: I
marvel that thou askest so many things concerning the city of Langton on
Holm, where I was born, and where are my kindred yet; for meseemeth that
thou knowest it thyself."

"I know it, I?" said the Lady.

"What, then! thou knowest it not?" said Walter.

Spake the Lady, and some of her old disdain was in her words: "Dost thou
deem that I wander about the world and its cheaping-steads like one of
the chap-men?  Nay, I dwell in the Wood beyond the World, and nowhere
else.  What hath put this word into thy mouth?"

He said: "Pardon me, Lady, if I have misdone; but thus it was: Mine own
eyes beheld thee going down the quays of our city, and thence a
ship-board, and the ship sailed out of the haven.  And first of all went
a strange dwarf, whom I have seen here, and then thy Maid; and then went
thy gracious and lovely body."

The Lady's face changed as he spoke, and she turned red and then pale,
and set her teeth; but she refrained her, and said: "Squire, I see of
thee that thou art no liar, nor light of wit, therefore I suppose that
thou hast verily seen some appearance of me; but never have I been in
Langton, nor thought thereof, nor known that such a stead there was until
thou namedst it e'en now.  Wherefore, I deem that an enemy hath cast the
shadow of me on the air of that land."

"Yea, my Lady," said Walter; "and what enemy mightest thou have to have
done this?"

She was slow of answer, but spake at last from a quivering mouth of
anger: "Knowest thou not the saw, that a man's foes are they of his own
house?  If I find out for a truth who hath done this, the said enemy
shall have an evil hour with me."

Again she was silent, and she clenched her hands and strained her limbs
in the heat of her anger; so that Walter was afraid of her, and all his
misgivings came back to his heart again, and he repented that he had told
her so much.  But in a little while all that trouble and wrath seemed to
flow off her, and again was she of good cheer, and kind and sweet to him
and she said: "But in sooth, however it may be, I thank thee, my Squire
and friend, for telling me hereof.  And surely no wyte do I lay on thee.
And, moreover, is it not this vision which hath brought thee hither?"

"So it is, Lady," said he.

"Then have we to thank it," said the Lady, "and thou art welcome to our
land."

And therewith she held out her hand to him, and he took it on his knees
and kissed it: and then it was as if a red-hot iron had run through his
heart, and he felt faint, and bowed down his head.  But he held her hand
yet, and kissed it many times, and the wrist and the arm, and knew not
where he was.

But she drew a little away from him, and arose and said: "Now is the day
wearing, and if we are to bear back any venison we must buckle to the
work.  So arise, Squire, and take the hounds and come with me; for not
far off is a little thicket which mostly harbours foison of deer, great
and small.  Let us come our ways."




CHAPTER XV: THE SLAYING OF THE QUARRY


So they walked on quietly thence some half a mile, and ever the Lady
would have Walter to walk by her side, and not follow a little behind
her, as was meet for a servant to do; and she touched his hand at whiles
as she showed him beast and fowl and tree, and the sweetness of her body
overcame him, so that for a while he thought of nothing save her.

Now when they were come to the thicket-side, she turned to him and said:
"Squire, I am no ill woodman, so that thou mayst trust me that we shall
not be brought to shame the second time; and I shall do sagely; so nock
an arrow to thy bow, and abide me here, and stir not hence; for I shall
enter this thicket without the hounds, and arouse the quarry for thee;
and see that thou be brisk and clean-shooting, and then shalt thou have a
reward of me."

Therewith she drew up her skirts through her girdle again, took her bent
bow in her hand, and drew an arrow out of the quiver, and stepped lightly
into the thicket, leaving him longing for the sight of her, as he
hearkened to the tread of her feet on the dry leaves, and the rustling of
the brake as she thrust through it.

Thus he stood for a few minutes, and then he heard a kind of gibbering
cry without words, yet as of a woman, coming from the thicket, and while
his heart was yet gathering the thought that something had gone amiss, he
glided swiftly, but with little stir, into the brake.

He had gone but a little way ere he saw the Lady standing there in a
narrow clearing, her face pale as death, her knees cleaving together, her
body swaying and tottering, her hands hanging down, and the bow and arrow
fallen to the ground; and ten yards before her a great-headed yellow
creature crouching flat to the earth and slowly drawing nigher.

He stopped short; one arrow was already notched to the string, and
another hung loose to the lesser fingers of his string-hand.  He raised
his right hand, and drew and loosed in a twinkling; the shaft flew close
to the Lady's side, and straightway all the wood rung with a huge roar,
as the yellow lion turned about to bite at the shaft which had sunk deep
into him behind the shoulder, as if a bolt out of the heavens had smitten
him.  But straightway had Walter loosed again, and then, throwing down
his bow, he ran forward with his drawn sword gleaming in his hand, while
the lion weltered and rolled, but had no might to move forward.  Then
Walter went up to him warily and thrust him through to the heart, and
leapt aback, lest the beast might yet have life in him to smite; but he
left his struggling, his huge voice died out, and he lay there moveless
before the hunter.

Walter abode a little, facing him, and then turned about to the Lady, and
she had fallen down in a heap whereas she stood, and lay there all
huddled up and voiceless.  So he knelt down by her, and lifted up her
head, and bade her arise, for the foe was slain.  And after a little she
stretched out her limbs, and turned about on the grass, and seemed to
sleep, and the colour came into her face again, and it grew soft and a
little smiling.  Thus she lay awhile, and Walter sat by her watching her,
till at last she opened her eyes and sat up, and knew him, and smiling on
him said: "What hath befallen, Squire, that I have slept and dreamed?"

He answered nothing, till her memory came back to her, and then she
arose, trembling and pale, and said: "Let us leave this wood, for the
Enemy is therein."

And she hastened away before him till they came out at the thicket-side
whereas the hounds had been left, and they were standing there uneasy and
whining; so Walter coupled them, while the Lady stayed not, but went away
swiftly homeward, and Walter followed.

At last she stayed her swift feet, and turned round on Walter, and said:
"Squire, come hither."

So did he, and she said: "I am weary again; let us sit under this quicken-
tree, and rest us."

So they sat down, and she sat looking between her knees a while; and at
last she said: "Why didst thou not bring the lion's hide?"

He said: "Lady, I will go back and flay the beast, and bring on the
hide."

And he arose therewith, but she caught him by the skirts and drew him
down, and said: "Nay, thou shalt not go; abide with me.  Sit down again."

He did so, and she said: "Thou shalt not go from me; for I am afraid: I
am not used to looking on the face of death."

She grew pale as she spoke, and set a hand to her breast, and sat so a
while without speaking.  At last she turned to him smiling, and said:
"How was it with the aspect of me when I stood before the peril of the
Enemy?"  And she laid a hand upon his.

"O gracious one," quoth he, "thou wert, as ever, full lovely, but I
feared for thee."

She moved not her hand from his, and she said: "Good and true Squire, I
said ere I entered the thicket e'en now that I would reward thee if thou
slewest the quarry.  He is dead, though thou hast left the skin behind
upon the carcase.  Ask now thy reward, but take time to think what it
shall be."

He felt her hand warm upon his, and drew in the sweet odour of her
mingled with the woodland scents under the hot sun of the afternoon, and
his heart was clouded with manlike desire of her.  And it was a near
thing but he had spoken, and craved of her the reward of the freedom of
her Maid, and that he might depart with her into other lands; but as his
mind wavered betwixt this and that, the Lady, who had been eyeing him
keenly, drew her hand away from him; and therewith doubt and fear flowed
into his mind, and he refrained him of speech.

Then she laughed merrily and said: "The good Squire is shamefaced; he
feareth a lady more than a lion.  Will it be a reward to thee if I bid
thee to kiss my cheek?"

Therewith she leaned her face toward him, and he kissed her
well-favouredly, and then sat gazing on her, wondering what should betide
to him on the morrow.

Then she arose and said: "Come, Squire, and let us home; be not abashed,
there shall be other rewards hereafter."

So they went their ways quietly; and it was nigh sunset against they
entered the house again.  Walter looked round for the Maid, but beheld
her not; and the Lady said to him: "I go to my chamber, and now is thy
service over for this day."

Then she nodded to him friendly and went her ways.




CHAPTER XVI: OF THE KING'S SON AND THE MAID


But as for Walter, he went out of the house again, and fared slowly over
the woodlawns till he came to another close thicket or brake; he entered
from mere wantonness, or that he might be the more apart and hidden, so
as to think over his case.  There he lay down under the thick boughs, but
could not so herd his thoughts that they would dwell steady in looking
into what might come to him within the next days; rather visions of those
two women and the monster did but float before him, and fear and desire
and the hope of life ran to and fro in his mind.

As he lay thus he heard footsteps drawing near, and he looked between the
boughs, and though the sun had just set, he could see close by him a man
and a woman going slowly, and they hand in hand; at first he deemed it
would be the King's Son and the Lady, but presently he saw that it was
the King's Son indeed, but that it was the Maid whom he was holding by
the hand.  And now he saw of him that his eyes were bright with desire,
and of her that she was very pale.  Yet when he heard her begin to speak,
it was in a steady voice that she said: "King's Son, thou hast threatened
me oft and unkindly, and now thou threatenest me again, and no less
unkindly.  But whatever were thy need herein before, now is there no more
need; for my Mistress, of whom thou wert weary, is now grown weary of
thee, and belike will not now reward me for drawing thy love to me, as
once she would have done; to wit, before the coming of this stranger.
Therefore I say, since I am but a thrall, poor and helpless, betwixt you
two mighty ones, I have no choice but to do thy will."

As she spoke she looked all round about her, as one distraught by the
anguish of fear.  Walter, amidst of his wrath and grief, had wellnigh
drawn his sword and rushed out of his lair upon the King's Son.  But he
deemed it sure that, so doing, he should undo the Maid altogether, and
himself also belike, so he refrained him, though it were a hard matter.

The Maid had stayed her feet now close to where Walter lay, some five
yards from him only, and he doubted whether she saw him not from where
she stood.  As to the King's Son, he was so intent upon the Maid, and so
greedy of her beauty, that it was not like that he saw anything.

Now moreover Walter looked, and deemed that he beheld something through
the grass and bracken on the other side of those two, an ugly brown and
yellow body, which, if it were not some beast of the foumart kind, must
needs be the monstrous dwarf, or one of his kin; and the flesh crept upon
Walter's bones with the horror of him.  But the King's Son spoke unto the
Maid: "Sweetling, I shall take the gift thou givest me, neither shall I
threaten thee any more, howbeit thou givest it not very gladly or
graciously."

She smiled on him with her lips alone, for her eyes were wandering and
haggard.  "My lord," she said, "is not this the manner of women?"

"Well," he said, "I say that I will take thy love even so given.  Yet let
me hear again that thou lovest not that vile newcomer, and that thou hast
not seen him, save this morning along with my Lady.  Nay now, thou shalt
swear it."

"What shall I swear by?" she said.

Quoth he, "Thou shalt swear by my body;" and therewith he thrust himself
close up against her; but she drew her hand from his, and laid it on his
breast, and said: "I swear it by thy body."

He smiled on her licorously, and took her by the shoulders, and kissed
her face many times, and then stood aloof from her, and said: "Now have I
had hansel: but tell me, when shall I come to thee?"

She spoke out clearly: "Within three days at furthest; I will do thee to
wit of the day and the hour to-morrow, or the day after."

He kissed her once more, and said: "Forget it not, or the threat holds
good."

And therewith he turned about and went his ways toward the house; and
Walter saw the yellow-brown thing creeping after him in the gathering
dusk.

As for the Maid, she stood for a while without moving, and looking after
the King's Son and the creature that followed him.  Then she turned about
to where Walter lay and lightly put aside the boughs, and Walter leapt
up, and they stood face to face.  She said softly but eagerly: "Friend,
touch me not yet!"

He spake not, but looked on her sternly.  She said: "Thou art angry with
me?"

Still he spake not; but she said: "Friend, this at least I will pray
thee; not to play with life and death; with happiness and misery.  Dost
thou not remember the oath which we swore each to each but a little while
ago?  And dost thou deem that I have changed in these few days?  Is thy
mind concerning thee and me the same as it was?  If it be not so, now
tell me.  For now have I the mind to do as if neither thou nor I are
changed to each other, whoever may have kissed mine unwilling lips, or
whomsoever thy lips may have kissed.  But if thou hast changed, and wilt
no longer give me thy love, nor crave mine, then shall this steel" (and
she drew a sharp knife from her girdle) "be for the fool and the dastard
who hath made thee wroth with me, my friend, and my friend that I deemed
I had won.  And then let come what will come!  But if thou be nought
changed, and the oath yet holds, then, when a little while hath passed,
may we thrust all evil and guile and grief behind us, and long joy shall
lie before us, and long life, and all honour in death: if only thou wilt
do as I bid thee, O my dear, and my friend, and my first friend!"

He looked on her, and his breast heaved up as all the sweetness of her
kind love took hold on him, and his face changed, and the tears filled
his eyes and ran over, and rained down before her, and he stretched out
his hand toward her.

Then she said exceeding sweetly: "Now indeed I see that it is well with
me, yea, and with thee also.  A sore pain it is to me, that not even now
may I take thine hand, and cast mine arms about thee, and kiss the lips
that love me.  But so it has to be.  My dear, even so I were fain to
stand here long before thee, even if we spake no more word to each other;
but abiding here is perilous; for there is ever an evil spy upon my
doings, who has now as I deem followed the King's Son to the house, but
who will return when he has tracked him home thither: so we must sunder.
But belike there is yet time for a word or two: first, the rede which I
had thought on for our deliverance is now afoot, though I durst not tell
thee thereof, nor have time thereto.  But this much shall I tell thee,
that whereas great is the craft of my Mistress in wizardry, yet I also
have some little craft therein, and this, which she hath not, to change
the aspect of folk so utterly that they seem other than they verily are;
yea, so that one may have the aspect of another.  Now the next thing is
this: whatsoever my Mistress may bid thee, do her will therein with no
more nay-saying than thou deemest may please her.  And the next thing:
wheresoever thou mayst meet me, speak not to me, make no sign to me, even
when I seem to be all alone, till I stoop down and touch the ring on my
ankle with my right hand; but if I do so, then stay thee, without fail,
till I speak.  The last thing I will say to thee, dear friend, ere we
both go our ways, this it is.  When we are free, and thou knowest all
that I have done, I pray thee deem me not evil and wicked, and be not
wroth with me for my deed; whereas thou wottest well that I am not in
like plight with other women.  I have heard tell that when the knight
goeth to the war, and hath overcome his foes by the shearing of swords
and guileful tricks, and hath come back home to his own folk, they praise
him and bless him, and crown him with flowers, and boast of him before
God in the minster for his deliverance of friend and folk and city.  Why
shouldst thou be worse to me than this?  Now is all said, my dear and my
friend; farewell, farewell!"

Therewith she turned and went her ways toward the house in all speed, but
making somewhat of a compass.  And when she was gone, Walter knelt down
and kissed the place where her feet had been, and arose thereafter, and
made his way toward the house, he also, but slowly, and staying oft on
his way.




CHAPTER XVII: OF THE HOUSE AND THE PLEASANCE IN THE WOOD


On the morrow morning Walter loitered a while about the house till the
morn was grown old, and then about noon he took his bow and arrows and
went into the woods to the northward, to get him some venison.  He went
somewhat far ere he shot him a fawn, and then he sat him down to rest
under the shade of a great chestnut-tree, for it was not far past the
hottest of the day.  He looked around thence and saw below him a little
dale with a pleasant stream running through it, and he bethought him of
bathing therein, so he went down and had his pleasure of the water and
the willowy banks; for he lay naked a while on the grass by the lip of
the water, for joy of the flickering shade, and the little breeze that
ran over the down-long ripples of the stream.

Then he did on his raiment, and began to come his ways up the bent, but
had scarce gone three steps ere he saw a woman coming towards him from
downstream.  His heart came into his mouth when he saw her, for she
stooped and reached down her arm, as if she would lay her hand on her
ankle, so that at first he deemed it had been the Maid, but at the second
eye-shot he saw that it was the Mistress.  She stood still and looked on
him, so that he deemed she would have him come to her.  So he went to
meet her, and grew somewhat shamefaced as he drew nigher, and wondered at
her, for now was she clad but in one garment of some dark grey silky
stuff, embroidered with, as it were, a garland of flowers about the
middle, but which was so thin that, as the wind drifted it from side and
limb, it hid her no more, but for the said garland, than if water were
running over her: her face was full of smiling joy and content as she
spake to him in a kind, caressing voice, and said: "I give thee good day,
good Squire, and well art thou met."  And she held out her hand to him.
He knelt down before her and kissed it, and abode still upon his knees,
and hanging down his head.

But she laughed outright, and stooped down to him, and put her hand to
his arms, and raised him up, and said to him: "What is this, my Squire,
that thou kneelest to me as to an idol?"

He said faltering: "I wot not; but perchance thou art an idol; and I fear
thee."

"What!" she said, "more than yesterday, whenas thou sawest me afraid?"

Said he: "Yea, for that now I see thee unhidden, and meseemeth there hath
been none such since the old days of the Gentiles."

She said: "Hast thou not yet bethought thee of a gift to crave of me, a
reward for the slaying of mine enemy, and the saving of me from death?"

"O my Lady," he said, "even so much would I have done for any other lady,
or, forsooth, for any poor man; for so my manhood would have bidden me.
Speak not of gifts to me then.  Moreover" (and he reddened therewith, and
his voice faltered), "didst thou not give me my sweet reward yesterday?
What more durst I ask?"

She held her peace awhile, and looked on him keenly; and he reddened
under her gaze.  Then wrath came into her face, and she reddened and knit
her brows, and spake to him in a voice of anger, and said: "Nay, what is
this?  It is growing in my mind that thou deemest the gift of me
unworthy!  Thou, an alien, an outcast; one endowed with the little wisdom
of the World without the Wood!  And here I stand before thee, all
glorious in my nakedness, and so fulfilled of wisdom, that I can make
this wilderness to any whom I love more full of joy than the kingdoms and
cities of the world--and thou!--Ah, but it is the Enemy that hath done
this, and made the guileless guileful!  Yet will I have the upper hand at
least, though thou suffer for it, and I suffer for thee."

Walter stood before her with hanging head, and he put forth his hands as
if praying off her anger, and pondered what answer he should make; for
now he feared for himself and the Maid; so at last he looked up to her,
and said boldly: "Nay, Lady, I know what thy words mean, whereas I
remember thy first welcome of me.  I wot, forsooth, that thou wouldst
call me base-born, and of no account, and unworthy to touch the hem of
thy raiment; and that I have been over-bold, and guilty towards thee; and
doubtless this is sooth, and I have deserved thine anger: but I will not
ask thee to pardon me, for I have done but what I must needs."

She looked on him calmly now, and without any wrath, but rather as if she
would read what was written in his inmost heart.  Then her face changed
into joyousness again, and she smote her palms together, and cried out:
"This is but foolish talk; for yesterday did I see thy valiancy, and to-
day I have seen thy goodliness; and I say, that though thou mightest not
be good enough for a fool woman of the earthly baronage, yet art thou
good enough for me, the wise and the mighty, and the lovely.  And whereas
thou sayest that I gave thee but disdain when first thou camest to us,
grudge not against me therefor, because it was done but to prove thee;
and now thou art proven."

Then again he knelt down before her, and embraced her knees, and again
she raised him up, and let her arm hang down over his shoulder, and her
cheek brush his cheek; and she kissed his mouth and said: "Hereby is all
forgiven, both thine offence and mine; and now cometh joy and merry
days."

Therewith her smiling face grew grave, and she stood before him looking
stately and gracious and kind at once, and she took his hand and said:
"Thou mightest deem my chamber in the Golden House of the Wood
over-queenly, since thou art no masterful man.  So now hast thou chosen
well the place wherein to meet me to-day, for hard by on the other side
of the stream is a bower of pleasance, which, forsooth, not every one who
cometh to this land may find; there shall I be to thee as one of the up-
country damsels of thine own land, and thou shalt not be abashed."

She sidled up to him as she spoke, and would he, would he not, her sweet
voice tickled his very soul with pleasure, and she looked aside on him
happy and well-content.

So they crossed the stream by the shallow below the pool wherein Walter
had bathed, and within a little they came upon a tall fence of
flake-hurdles, and a simple gate therein.  The Lady opened the same, and
they entered thereby into a close all planted as a most fair garden, with
hedges of rose and woodbine, and with linden-trees a-blossom, and long
ways of green grass betwixt borders of lilies and clove-gilliflowers, and
other sweet garland-flowers.  And a branch of the stream which they had
crossed erewhile wandered through that garden; and in the midst was a
little house built of post and pan, and thatched with yellow straw, as if
it were new done.

Then Walter looked this way and that, and wondered at first, and tried to
think in his mind what should come next, and how matters would go with
him; but his thought would not dwell steady on any other matter than the
beauty of the Lady amidst the beauty of the garden; and withal she was
now grown so sweet and kind, and even somewhat timid and shy with him,
that scarce did he know whose hand he held, or whose fragrant bosom and
sleek side went so close to him.

So they wandered here and there through the waning of the day, and when
they entered at last into the cool dusk house, then they loved and played
together, as if they were a pair of lovers guileless, with no fear for
the morrow, and no seeds of enmity and death sown betwixt them.




CHAPTER XVIII: THE MAID GIVES WALTER TRYST


Now, on the morrow, when Walter was awake, he found there was no one
lying beside him, and the day was no longer very young; so he arose, and
went through the garden from end to end, and all about, and there was
none there; and albeit that he dreaded to meet the Lady there, yet was he
sad at heart and fearful of what might betide.  Howsoever, he found the
gate whereby they had entered yesterday, and he went out into the little
dale; but when he had gone a step or two he turned about, and could see
neither garden nor fence, nor any sign of what he had seen thereof but
lately.  He knit his brow and stood still to think of it, and his heart
grew the heavier thereby; but presently he went his ways and crossed the
stream, but had scarce come up on to the grass on the further side, ere
he saw a woman coming to meet him, and at first, full as he was of the
tide of yesterday and the wondrous garden, deemed that it would be the
Lady; but the woman stayed her feet, and, stooping, laid a hand on her
right ankle, and he saw that it was the Maid.  He drew anigh to her, and
saw that she was nought so sad of countenance as the last time she had
met him, but flushed of cheek and bright-eyed.

As he came up to her she made a step or two to meet him, holding out her
two hands, and then refrained her, and said smiling: "Ah, friend, belike
this shall be the last time that I shall say to thee, touch me not, nay,
not so much as my hand, or if it were but the hem of my raiment."

The joy grew up in his heart, and he gazed on her fondly, and said: "Why,
what hath befallen of late?"

"O friend," she began, "this hath befallen."

But as he looked on her, the smile died from her face, and she became
deadly pale to the very lips; she looked askance to her left side,
whereas ran the stream; and Walter followed her eyes, and deemed for one
instant that he saw the misshapen yellow visage of the dwarf peering
round from a grey rock, but the next there was nothing.  Then the Maid,
though she were as pale as death, went on in a clear, steady, hard voice,
wherein was no joy or kindness, keeping her face to Walter and her back
to the stream: "This hath befallen, friend, that there is no longer any
need to refrain thy love nor mine; therefore I say to thee, come to my
chamber (and it is the red chamber over against thine, though thou
knewest it not) an hour before this next midnight, and then thy sorrow
and mine shall be at an end: and now I must needs depart.  Follow me not,
but remember!"

And therewith she turned about and fled like the wind down the stream.

But Walter stood wondering, and knew not what to make of it, whether it
were for good or ill: for he knew now that she had paled and been seized
with terror because of the upheaving of the ugly head; and yet she had
seemed to speak out the very thing she had to say.  Howsoever it were, he
spake aloud to himself: Whatever comes, I will keep tryst with her.

Then he drew his sword, and turned this way and that, looking all about
if he might see any sign of the Evil Thing; but nought might his eyes
behold, save the grass, and the stream, and the bushes of the dale.  So
then, still holding his naked sword in his hand, he clomb the bent out of
the dale; for that was the only way he knew to the Golden House; and when
he came to the top, and the summer breeze blew in his face, and he looked
down a fair green slope beset with goodly oaks and chestnuts, he was
refreshed with the life of the earth, and he felt the good sword in his
fist, and knew that there was might and longing in him, and the world
seemed open unto him.

So he smiled, if it were somewhat grimly, and sheathed his sword and went
on toward the house.




CHAPTER XIX: WALTER GOES TO FETCH HOME THE LION'S HIDE


He entered the cool dusk through the porch, and, looking down the
pillared hall, saw beyond the fountain a gleam of gold, and when he came
past the said fountain he looked up to the high-seat, and lo! the Lady
sitting there clad in her queenly raiment.  She called to him, and he
came; and she hailed him, and spake graciously and calmly, yet as if she
knew nought of him save as the leal servant of her, a high Lady.
"Squire," she said, "we have deemed it meet to have the hide of the
servant of the Enemy, the lion to wit, whom thou slewest yesterday, for a
carpet to our feet; wherefore go now, take thy wood-knife, and flay the
beast, and bring me home his skin.  This shall be all thy service for
this day, so mayst thou do it at thine own leisure, and not weary
thyself.  May good go with thee."

He bent the knee before her, and she smiled on him graciously, but
reached out no hand for him to kiss, and heeded him but little.
Wherefore, in spite of himself, and though he knew somewhat of her guile,
he could not help marvelling that this should be she who had lain in his
arms night-long but of late.

Howso that might be, he took his way toward the thicket where he had
slain the lion, and came thither by then it was afternoon, at the hottest
of the day.  So he entered therein, and came to the very place whereas
the Lady had lain, when she fell down before the terror of the lion; and
there was the mark of her body on the grass where she had lain that
while, like as it were the form of a hare.  But when Walter went on to
where he had slain that great beast, lo! he was gone, and there was no
sign of him; but there were Walter's own footprints, and the two shafts
which he had shot, one feathered red, and one blue.  He said at first:
Belike someone hath been here, and hath had the carcase away.  Then he
laughed in very despite, and said: How may that be, since there are no
signs of dragging away of so huge a body, and no blood or fur on the
grass if they had cut him up, and moreover no trampling of feet, as if
there had been many men at the deed.  Then was he all abashed, and again
laughed in scorn of himself, and said: Forsooth I deemed I had done
manly; but now forsooth I shot nought, and nought there was before the
sword of my father's son.  And what may I deem now, but that this is a
land of mere lies, and that there is nought real and alive therein save
me.  Yea, belike even these trees and the green grass will presently
depart from me, and leave me falling down through the clouds.

Therewith he turned away, and gat him to the road that led to the Golden
House, wondering what next should befall him, and going slowly as he
pondered his case.  So came he to that first thicket where they had lost
their quarry by water; so he entered the same, musing, and bathed him in
the pool that was therein, after he had wandered about it awhile, and
found nothing new.

So again he set him to the homeward road, when the day was now waning,
and it was near sunset that he was come nigh unto the house, though it
was hidden from him as then by a low bent that rose before him; and there
he abode and looked about him.

Now as he looked, over the said bent came the figure of a woman, who
stayed on the brow thereof and looked all about her, and then ran swiftly
down to meet Walter, who saw at once that it was the Maid.

She made no stay then till she was but three paces from him, and then she
stooped down and made the sign to him, and then spake to him
breathlessly, and said: "Hearken! but speak not till I have done: I bade
thee to-night's meeting because I saw that there was one anigh whom I
must needs beguile.  But by thine oath, and thy love, and all that thou
art, I adjure thee come not unto me this night as I bade thee! but be
hidden in the hazel-copse outside the house, as it draws toward midnight,
and abide me there.  Dost thou hearken, and wilt thou?  Say yes or no in
haste, for I may not tarry a moment of time.  Who knoweth what is behind
me?"

"Yes," said Walter hastily; "but friend and love--"

"No more," she said; "hope the best;" and turning from him she ran away
swiftly, not by the way she had come, but sideways, as though to reach
the house by fetching a compass.

But Walter went slowly on his way, thinking within himself that now at
that present moment there was nought for it but to refrain him from
doing, and to let others do; yet deemed he that it was little manly to be
as the pawn upon the board, pushed about by the will of others.

Then, as he went, he bethought him of the Maiden's face and aspect, as
she came running to him, and stood before him for that minute; and all
eagerness he saw in her, and sore love of him, and distress of soul, all
blent together.

So came he to the brow of the bent whence he could see lying before him,
scarce more than a bow-shot away, the Golden House now gilded again and
reddened by the setting sun.  And even therewith came a gay image toward
him, flashing back the level rays from gold and steel and silver; and lo!
there was come the King's Son.  They met presently, and the King's Son
turned to go beside him, and said merrily: "I give thee good even, my
Lady's Squire!  I owe thee something of courtesy, whereas it is by thy
means that I shall be made happy, both to-night, and to-morrow, and many
to-morrows; and sooth it is, that but little courtesy have I done thee
hitherto."

His face was full of joy, and the eyes of him shone with gladness.  He
was a goodly man, but to Walter he seemed an ill one; and he hated him so
much, that he found it no easy matter to answer him; but he refrained
himself, and said: "I can thee thank, King's Son; and good it is that
someone is happy in this strange land."

"Art thou not happy then, Squire of my Lady?" said the other.

Walter had no mind to show this man his heart, nay, nor even a corner
thereof; for he deemed him an enemy.  So he smiled sweetly and somewhat
foolishly, as a man luckily in love, and said: "O yea, yea, why should I
not be so?  How might I be otherwise?"

"Yea then," said the King's Son, "why didst thou say that thou wert glad
someone is happy?  Who is unhappy, deemest thou?" and he looked on him
keenly.

Walter answered slowly: "Said I so?  I suppose then that I was thinking
of thee; for when first I saw thee, yea, and afterwards, thou didst seem
heavy-hearted and ill-content."

The face of the King's Son cleared at this word, and he said: "Yea, so it
was; for look you, both ways it was: I was unfree, and I had sown the
true desire of my heart whereas it waxed not.  But now I am on the brink
and verge of freedom, and presently shall my desire be blossomed.  Nay
now, Squire, I deem thee a good fellow, though it may be somewhat of a
fool; so I will no more speak riddles to thee.  Thus it is: the Maid hath
promised me all mine asking, and is mine; and in two or three days, by
her helping also, I shall see the world again."

Quoth Walter, smiling askance on him: "And the Lady? what shall she say
to this matter?"

The King's Son reddened, but smiled falsely enough, and said: "Sir
Squire, thou knowest enough not to need to ask this.  Why should I tell
thee that she accounteth more of thy little finger than of my whole body?
Now I tell thee hereof freely; first, because this my fruition of love,
and my freeing from thralldom, is, in a way, of thy doing.  For thou art
become my supplanter, and hast taken thy place with yonder lovely tyrant.
Fear not for me! she will let me go.  As for thyself, see thou to it!  But
again I tell thee hereof because my heart is light and full of joy, and
telling thee will pleasure me, and cannot do me any harm.  For if thou
say: How if I carry the tale to my Lady?  I answer, thou wilt not.  For I
know that thine heart hath been somewhat set on the jewel that my hand
holdeth; and thou knowest well on whose head the Lady's wrath would fall,
and that would be neither thine nor mine."

"Thou sayest sooth," said Walter; "neither is treason my wont."

So they walked on silently a while, and then Walter said: "But how if the
Maiden had nay-said thee; what hadst thou done then?"

"By the heavens!" said the King's Son fiercely, "she should have paid for
her nay-say; then would I--"  But he broke off, and said quietly, yet
somewhat doggedly: "Why talk of what might have been?  She gave me her
yea-say pleasantly and sweetly."

Now Walter knew that the man lied, so he held his peace thereon; but
presently he said: "When thou art free wilt thou go to thine own land
again?"

"Yea," said the King's Son; "she will lead me thither."

"And wilt thou make her thy lady and queen when thou comest to thy
father's land?" said Walter.

The King's Son knit his brow, and said: "When I am in mine own land I may
do with her what I will; but I look for it that I shall do no otherwise
with her than that she shall be well-content."

Then the talk between them dropped, and the King's Son turned off toward
the wood, singing and joyous; but Walter went soberly toward the house.
Forsooth he was not greatly cast down, for besides that he knew that the
King's Son was false, he deemed that under this double tryst lay
something which was a-doing in his own behalf.  Yet was he eager and
troubled, if not down-hearted, and his soul was cast about betwixt hope
and fear.




CHAPTER XX: WALTER IS BIDDEN TO ANOTHER TRYST


So came he into the pillared hall, and there he found the Lady walking to
and fro by the high-seat; and when he drew nigh she turned on him, and
said in a voice rather eager than angry: "What hast thou done, Squire?
Why art thou come before me?"

He was abashed, and bowed before her and said: "O gracious Lady, thou
badest me service, and I have been about it."

She said: "Tell me then, tell me, what hath betided?"

"Lady," said he, "when I entered the thicket of thy swooning I found
there no carcase of the lion, nor any sign of the dragging away of him."

She looked full in his face for a little, and then went to her chair, and
sat down therein; and in a little while spake to him in a softer voice,
and said: "Did I not tell thee that some enemy had done that unto me? and
lo! now thou seest that so it is."

Then was she silent again, and knit her brows and set her teeth; and
thereafter she spake harshly and fiercely: "But I will overcome her, and
make her days evil, but keep death away from her, that she may die many
times over; and know all the sickness of the heart, when foes be nigh,
and friends afar, and there is none to deliver!"

Her eyes flashed, and her face was dark with anger; but she turned and
caught Walter's eyes, and the sternness of his face, and she softened at
once, and said: "But thou! this hath little to do with thee; and now to
thee I speak: Now cometh even and night.  Go thou to thy chamber, and
there shalt thou find raiment worthy of thee, what thou now art, and what
thou shalt be; do on the same, and make thyself most goodly, and then
come thou hither and eat and drink with me, and afterwards depart whither
thou wilt, till the night has worn to its midmost; and then come thou to
my chamber, to wit, through the ivory door in the gallery above; and then
and there shall I tell thee a thing, and it shall be for the weal both of
thee and of me, but for the grief and woe of the Enemy."

Therewith she reached her hand to him, and he kissed it, and departed and
came to his chamber, and found raiment therebefore rich beyond measure;
and he wondered if any new snare lay therein: yet if there were, he saw
no way whereby he might escape it, so he did it on, and became as the
most glorious of kings, and yet lovelier than any king of the world.

Sithence he went his way into the pillared hall, when it was now night,
and without the moon was up, and the trees of the wood as still as
images.  But within the hall shone bright with many candles, and the
fountain glittered in the light of them, as it ran tinkling sweetly into
the little stream; and the silvern bridges gleamed, and the pillars shone
all round about.

And there on the dais was a table dight most royally, and the Lady
sitting thereat, clad in her most glorious array, and behind her the Maid
standing humbly, yet clad in precious web of shimmering gold, but with
feet unshod, and the iron ring upon her ankle.

So Walter came his ways to the high-seat, and the Lady rose and greeted
him, and took him by the hands, and kissed him on either cheek, and sat
him down beside her.  So they fell to their meat, and the Maid served
them; but the Lady took no more heed of her than if she were one of the
pillars of the hall; but Walter she caressed oft with sweet words, and
the touch of her hand, making him drink out of her cup and eat out of her
dish.  As to him, he was bashful by seeming, but verily fearful; he took
the Lady's caresses with what grace he might, and durst not so much as
glance at her Maid.  Long indeed seemed that banquet to him, and longer
yet endured the weariness of his abiding there, kind to his foe and
unkind to his friend; for after the banquet they still sat a while, and
the Lady talked much to Walter about many things of the ways of the
world, and he answered what he might, distraught as he was with the
thought of those two trysts which he had to deal with.

At last spake the Lady and said: "Now must I leave thee for a little, and
thou wottest where and how we shall meet next; and meanwhile disport thee
as thou wilt, so that thou weary not thyself, for I love to see thee
joyous."

Then she arose stately and grand; but she kissed Walter on the mouth ere
she turned to go out of the hall.  The Maid followed her; but or ever she
was quite gone, she stooped and made that sign, and looked over her
shoulder at Walter, as if in entreaty to him, and there was fear and
anguish in her face; but he nodded his head to her in yea-say of the
tryst in the hazel-copse, and in a trice she was gone.

Walter went down the hall, and forth into the early night; but in the
jaws of the porch he came up against the King's Son, who, gazing at his
attire glittering with all its gems in the moonlight, laughed out, and
said: "Now may it be seen how thou art risen in degree above me, whereas
I am but a king's son, and that a king of a far country; whereas thou art
a king of kings, or shalt be this night, yea, and of this very country
wherein we both are."

Now Walter saw the mock which lay under his words; but he kept back his
wrath, and answered: "Fair sir, art thou as well contented with thy lot
as when the sun went down?  Hast thou no doubt or fear?  Will the Maid
verily keep tryst with thee, or hath she given thee yea-say but to escape
thee this time?  Or, again, may she not turn to the Lady and appeal to
her against thee?"

Now when he had spoken these words, he repented thereof, and feared for
himself and the Maid, lest he had stirred some misgiving in that young
man's foolish heart.  But the King's Son did but laugh, and answered
nought but to Walter's last words, and said: "Yea, yea! this word of
thine showeth how little thou wottest of that which lieth betwixt my
darling and thine.  Doth the lamb appeal from the shepherd to the wolf?
Even so shall the Maid appeal from me to thy Lady.  What! ask thy Lady at
thy leisure what her wont hath been with her thrall; she shall think it a
fair tale to tell thee thereof.  But thereof is my Maid all whole now by
reason of her wisdom in leechcraft, or somewhat more.  And now I tell
thee again, that the beforesaid Maid must needs do my will; for if I be
the deep sea, and I deem not so ill of myself, that other one is the
devil; as belike thou shalt find out for thyself later on.  Yea, all is
well with me, and more than well."

And therewith he swung merrily into the litten hall.  But Walter went out
into the moonlit night, and wandered about for an hour or more, and stole
warily into the hall and thence into his own chamber.  There he did off
that royal array, and did his own raiment upon him; he girt him with
sword and knife, took his bow and quiver, and stole down and out again,
even as he had come in.  Then he fetched a compass, and came down into
the hazel-coppice from the north, and lay hidden there while the night
wore, till he deemed it would lack but little of midnight.




CHAPTER XXI: WALTER AND THE MAID FLEE FROM THE GOLDEN HOUSE


There he abode amidst the hazels, hearkening every littlest sound; and
the sounds were nought but the night voices of the wood, till suddenly
there burst forth from the house a great wailing cry.  Walter's heart
came up into his mouth, but he had no time to do aught, for following
hard on the cry came the sound of light feet close to him, the boughs
were thrust aside, and there was come the Maid, and she but in her white
coat, and barefoot.  And then first he felt the sweetness of her flesh on
his, for she caught him by the hand and said breathlessly: "Now, now!
there may yet be time, or even too much, it may be.  For the saving of
breath ask me no questions, but come!"

He dallied not, but went as she led, and they were lightfoot, both of
them.

They went the same way, due south to wit, whereby he had gone a-hunting
with the Lady; and whiles they ran and whiles they walked; but so fast
they went, that by grey of the dawn they were come as far as that coppice
or thicket of the Lion; and still they hastened onward, and but little
had the Maid spoken, save here and there a word to hearten up Walter, and
here and there a shy word of endearment.  At last the dawn grew into
early day, and as they came over the brow of a bent, they looked down
over a plain land whereas the trees grew scatter-meal, and beyond the
plain rose up the land into long green hills, and over those again were
blue mountains great and far away.

Then spake the Maid: "Over yonder lie the outlying mountains of the
Bears, and through them we needs must pass, to our great peril.  Nay,
friend," she said, as he handled his sword-hilt, "it must be patience and
wisdom to bring us through, and not the fallow blade of one man, though
he be a good one.  But look! below there runs a stream through the first
of the plain, and I see nought for it but we must now rest our bodies.
Moreover I have a tale to tell thee which is burning my heart; for maybe
there will be a pardon to ask of thee moreover; wherefore I fear thee."

Quoth Walter: "How may that be?"

She answered him not, but took his hand and led him down the bent.  But
he said: "Thou sayest, rest; but are we now out of all peril of the
chase?"

She said: "I cannot tell till I know what hath befallen her.  If she be
not to hand to set on her trackers, they will scarce happen on us now; if
it be not for that one."

And she shuddered, and he felt her hand change as he held it.

Then she said: "But peril or no peril, needs must we rest; for I tell
thee again, what I have to say to thee burneth my bosom for fear of thee,
so that I can go no further until I have told thee."

Then he said: "I wot not of this Queen and her mightiness and her
servants.  I will ask thereof later.  But besides the others, is there
not the King's Son, he who loves thee so unworthily?"

She paled somewhat, and said: "As for him, there had been nought for thee
to fear in him, save his treason: but now shall he neither love nor hate
any more; he died last midnight."

"Yea, and how?" said Walter.

"Nay," she said, "let me tell my tale all together once for all, lest
thou blame me overmuch.  But first we will wash us and comfort us as best
we may, and then amidst our resting shall the word be said."

By then were they come down to the stream-side, which ran fair in pools
and stickles amidst rocks and sandy banks.  She said: "There behind the
great grey rock is my bath, friend; and here is thine; and lo! the
uprising of the sun!"

So she went her ways to the said rock, and he bathed him, and washed the
night off him, and by then he was clad again she came back fresh and
sweet from the water, and with her lap full of cherries from a wilding
which overhung her bath.  So they sat down together on the green grass
above the sand, and ate the breakfast of the wilderness: and Walter was
full of content as he watched her, and beheld her sweetness and her
loveliness; yet were they, either of them, somewhat shy and shamefaced
each with the other; so that he did but kiss her hands once and again,
and though she shrank not from him, yet had she no boldness to cast
herself into his arms.




CHAPTER XXII: OF THE DWARF AND THE PARDON


Now she began to say: "My friend, now shall I tell thee what I have done
for thee and me; and if thou have a mind to blame me, and punish me, yet
remember first, that what I have done has been for thee and our hope of
happy life.  Well, I shall tell thee--"

But therewithal her speech failed her; and, springing up, she faced the
bent and pointed with her finger, and she all deadly pale, and shaking so
that she might scarce stand, and might speak no word, though a feeble
gibbering came from her mouth.

Walter leapt up and put his arm about her, and looked whitherward she
pointed, and at first saw nought; and then nought but a brown and yellow
rock rolling down the bent: and then at last he saw that it was the Evil
Thing which had met him when first he came into that land; and now it
stood upright, and he could see that it was clad in a coat of yellow
samite.

Then Walter stooped down and gat his bow into his hand, and stood before
the Maid, while he nocked an arrow.  But the monster made ready his
tackle while Walter was stooping down, and or ever he could loose, his
bow-string twanged, and an arrow flew forth and grazed the Maid's arm
above the elbow, so that the blood ran, and the Dwarf gave forth a harsh
and horrible cry.  Then flew Walter's shaft, and true was it aimed, so
that it smote the monster full on the breast, but fell down from him as
if he were made of stone.  Then the creature set up his horrible cry
again, and loosed withal, and Walter deemed that he had smitten the Maid,
for she fell down in a heap behind him.  Then waxed Walter wood-wroth,
and cast down his bow and drew his sword, and strode forward towards the
bent against the Dwarf.  But he roared out again, and there were words in
his roar, and he said "Fool! thou shalt go free if thou wilt give up the
Enemy."

"And who," said Walter, "is the Enemy?"

Yelled the Dwarf: "She, the pink and white thing lying there; she is not
dead yet; she is but dying for fear of me.  Yea, she hath reason!  I
could have set the shaft in her heart as easily as scratching her arm;
but I need her body alive, that I may wreak me on her."

"What wilt thou do with her?" said Walter; for now he had heard that the
Maid was not slain he had waxed wary again, and stood watching his
chance.

The Dwarf yelled so at his last word, that no word came from the noise a
while, and then he said: "What will I with her?  Let me at her, and stand
by and look on, and then shalt thou have a strange tale to carry off with
thee.  For I will let thee go this while."

Said Walter: "But what need to wreak thee?  What hath she done to thee?"

"What need! what need!" roared the Dwarf; "have I not told thee that she
is the Enemy?  And thou askest of what she hath done! of what!  Fool, she
is the murderer! she hath slain the Lady that was our Lady, and that made
us; she whom all we worshipped and adored.  O impudent fool!"

Therewith he nocked and loosed another arrow, which would have smitten
Walter in the face, but that he lowered his head in the very nick of
time; then with a great shout he rushed up the bent, and was on the Dwarf
before he could get his sword out, and leaping aloft dealt the creature a
stroke amidmost of the crown; and so mightily be smote, that he drave the
heavy sword right through to the teeth, so that he fell dead straightway.

Walter stood over him a minute, and when be saw that he moved not, he
went slowly down to the stream, whereby the Maid yet lay cowering down
and quivering all over, and covering her face with her hands.  Then he
took her by the wrist and said: "Up, Maiden, up! and tell me this tale of
the slaying."

But she shrunk away from him, and looked at him with wild eyes, and said:
"What hast thou done with him?  Is he gone?"

"He is dead," said Walter; "I have slain him; there lies he with cloven
skull on the bent-side: unless, forsooth, he vanish away like the lion I
slew! or else, perchance, he will come to life again!  And art thou a lie
like to the rest of them? let me hear of this slaying."

She rose up, and stood before him trembling, and said: "O, thou art angry
with me, and thine anger I cannot bear.  Ah, what have I done?  Thou hast
slain one, and I, maybe, the other; and never had we escaped till both
these twain were dead.  Ah! thou dost not know! thou dost not know!  O
me! what shall I do to appease thy wrath!"

He looked on her, and his heart rose to his mouth at the thought of
sundering from her.  Still he looked on her, and her piteous friendly
face melted all his heart; he threw down his sword, and took her by the
shoulders, and kissed her face over and over, and strained her to him, so
that he felt the sweetness of her bosom.  Then he lifted her up like a
child, and set her down on the green grass, and went down to the water,
and filled his hat therefrom, and came back to her; then he gave her to
drink, and bathed her face and her hands, so that the colour came aback
to the cheeks and lips of her: and she smiled on him and kissed his
hands, and said: "O now thou art kind to me."

"Yea," said he, "and true it is that if thou hast slain, I have done no
less, and if thou hast lied, even so have I; and if thou hast played the
wanton, as I deem not that thou hast, I full surely have so done.  So now
thou shalt pardon me, and when thy spirit has come back to thee, thou
shalt tell me thy tale in all friendship, and in all loving-kindness will
I hearken the same."

Therewith he knelt before her and kissed her feet.  But she said: "Yea,
yea; what thou willest, that will I do.  But first tell me one thing.
Hast thou buried this horror and hidden him in the earth?"

He deemed that fear had bewildered her, and that she scarcely yet knew
how things had gone.  But he said: "Fair sweet friend, I have not done it
as yet; but now will I go and do it, if it seem good to thee."

"Yea," she said, "but first must thou smite off his head, and lie it by
his buttocks when he is in the earth; or evil things will happen else.
This of the burying is no idle matter, I bid thee believe."

"I doubt it not," said he; "surely such malice as was in this one will be
hard to slay."  And he picked up his sword, and turned to go to the field
of deed.

She said: "I must needs go with thee; terror hath so filled my soul, that
I durst not abide here without thee."

So they went both together to where the creature lay.  The Maid durst not
look on the dead monster, but Walter noted that he was girt with a big
ungainly sax; so he drew it from the sheath, and there smote off the
hideous head of the fiend with his own weapon.  Then they twain together
laboured the earth, she with Walter's sword, he with the ugly sax, till
they had made a grave deep and wide enough; and therein they thrust the
creature, and covered him up, weapons and all together.




CHAPTER XXIII: OF THE PEACEFUL ENDING OF THAT WILD DAY


Thereafter Walter led the Maid down again, and said to her: "Now,
sweetling, shall the story be told."

"Nay, friend," she said, "not here.  This place hath been polluted by my
craven fear, and the horror of the vile wretch, of whom no words may tell
his vileness.  Let us hence and onward.  Thou seest I have once more come
to life again."

"But," said he, "thou hast been hurt by the Dwarf's arrow."

She laughed, and said: "Had I never had greater hurt from them than that,
little had been the tale thereof: yet whereas thou lookest dolorous about
it, we will speedily heal it."

Therewith she sought about, and found nigh the stream-side certain herbs;
and she spake words over them, and bade Walter lay them on the wound,
which, forsooth, was of the least, and he did so, and bound a strip of
his shirt about her arm; and then would she set forth.  But he said:
"Thou art all unshod; and but if that be seen to, our journey shall be
stayed by thy foot-soreness: I may make a shift to fashion thee brogues."

She said: "I may well go barefoot.  And in any case, I entreat thee that
we tarry here no longer, but go away hence, if it be but for a mile."

And she looked piteously on him, so that he might not gainsay her.

So then they crossed the stream, and set forward, when amidst all these
haps the day was worn to midmorning.  But after they had gone a mile,
they sat them down on a knoll under the shadow of a big thorn-tree,
within sight of the mountains.  Then said Walter: "Now will I cut thee
the brogues from the skirt of my buff-coat, which shall be well meet for
such work; and meanwhile shalt thou tell me thy tale."

"Thou art kind," she said; "but be kinder yet, and abide my tale till we
have done our day's work.  For we were best to make no long delay here;
because, though thou hast slain the King-dwarf, yet there be others of
his kindred, who swarm in some parts of the wood as the rabbits in a
warren.  Now true it is that they have but little understanding, less, it
may be, than the very brute beasts; and that, as I said afore, unless
they be set on our slot like to hounds, they shall have no inkling of
where to seek us, yet might they happen upon us by mere misadventure.  And
moreover, friend," quoth she, blushing, "I would beg of thee some little
respite; for though I scarce fear thy wrath any more, since thou hast
been so kind to me, yet is there shame in that which I have to tell thee.
Wherefore, since the fairest of the day is before us, let us use it all
we may, and, when thou hast done me my new foot-gear, get us gone forward
again."

He kissed her kindly and yea-said her asking: he had already fallen to
work on the leather, and in a while had fashioned her the brogues; so she
tied them to her feet, and arose with a smile and said: "Now am I hale
and strong again, what with the rest, and what with thy loving-kindness,
and thou shalt see how nimble I shall be to leave this land, for as fair
as it is.  Since forsooth a land of lies it is, and of grief to the
children of Adam."

So they went their ways thence, and fared nimbly indeed, and made no stay
till some three hours after noon, when they rested by a thicket-side,
where the strawberries grew plenty; they ate thereof what they would: and
from a great oak hard by Walter shot him first one culver, and then
another, and hung them to his girdle to be for their evening's meal;
sithence they went forward again, and nought befell them to tell of, till
they were come, whenas it lacked scarce an hour of sunset, to the banks
of another river, not right great, but bigger than the last one.  There
the Maid cast herself down and said: "Friend, no further will thy friend
go this even; nay, to say sooth, she cannot.  So now we will eat of thy
venison, and then shall my tale be, since I may no longer delay it; and
thereafter shall our slumber be sweet and safe as I deem."

She spake merrily now, and as one who feared nothing, and Walter was much
heartened by her words and her voice, and he fell to and made a fire, and
a woodland oven in the earth, and sithence dighted his fowl, and baked
them after the manner of wood-men.  And they ate, both of them, in all
love, and in good-liking of life, and were much strengthened by their
supper.  And when they were done, Walter eked his fire, both against the
chill of the midnight and dawning, and for a guard against wild beasts,
and by that time night was come, and the moon arisen.  Then the Maiden
drew up to the fire, and turned to Walter and spake.




CHAPTER XXIV: THE MAID TELLS OF WHAT HAD BEFALLEN HER


"Now, friend, by the clear of the moon and this firelight will I tell
what I may and can of my tale.  Thus it is: If I be wholly of the race of
Adam I wot not nor can I tell thee how many years old I may be.  For
there are, as it were, shards or gaps in my life, wherein are but a few
things dimly remembered, and doubtless many things forgotten.  I remember
well when I was a little child, and right happy, and there were people
about me whom I loved, and who loved me.  It was not in this land; but
all things were lovely there; the year's beginning, the happy mid-year,
the year's waning, the year's ending, and then again its beginning.  That
passed away, and then for a while is more than dimness, for nought I
remember save that I was.  Thereafter I remember again, and am a young
maiden, and I know some things, and long to know more.  I am nowise
happy; I am amongst people who bid me go, and I go; and do this, and I do
it: none loveth me, none tormenteth me; but I wear my heart in longing
for I scarce know what.  Neither then am I in this land, but in a land
that I love not, and a house that is big and stately, but nought lovely.
Then is a dim time again, and sithence a time not right clear; an evil
time, wherein I am older, wellnigh grown to womanhood.  There are a many
folk about me, and they foul, and greedy, and hard; and my spirit is
fierce, and my body feeble; and I am set to tasks that I would not do, by
them that are unwiser than I; and smitten I am by them that are less
valiant than I; and I know lack, and stripes, and divers misery.  But all
that is now become but a dim picture to me, save that amongst all these
unfriends is a friend to me; an old woman, who telleth me sweet tales of
other life, wherein all is high and goodly, or at the least valiant and
doughty, and she setteth hope in my heart and learneth me, and maketh me
to know much . . . O much . . . so that at last I am grown wise, and wise
to be mighty if I durst.  Yet am I nought in this land all this while,
but, as meseemeth, in a great and a foul city."

"And then, as it were, I fall asleep; and in my sleep is nought, save
here and there a wild dream, somedeal lovely, somedeal hideous: but of
this dream is my Mistress a part, and the monster, withal, whose head
thou didst cleave to-day.  But when I am awaken from it, then am I verily
in this land, and myself, as thou seest me to-day.  And the first part of
my life here is this, that I am in the pillared ball yonder, half-clad
and with bound hands; and the Dwarf leadeth me to the Lady, and I hear
his horrible croak as he sayeth: 'Lady, will this one do?' and then the
sweet voice of the Lady saying: 'This one will do; thou shalt have thy
reward: now, set thou the token upon her.'  Then I remember the Dwarf
dragging me away, and my heart sinking for fear of him: but for that time
he did me no more harm than the rivetting upon my leg this iron ring
which here thou seest."

"So from that time forward I have lived in this land, and been the thrall
of the Lady; and I remember my life here day by day, and no part of it
has fallen into the dimness of dreams.  Thereof will I tell thee but
little: but this I will tell thee, that in spite of my past dreams, or it
may be because of them, I had not lost the wisdom which the old woman had
erst learned me, and for more wisdom I longed.  Maybe this longing shall
now make both thee and me happy, but for the passing time it brought me
grief.  For at first my Mistress was indeed wayward with me, but as any
great lady might be with her bought thrall, whiles caressing me, and
whiles chastising me, as her mood went; but she seemed not to be cruel of
malice, or with any set purpose.  But so it was (rather little by little
than by any great sudden uncovering of my intent), that she came to know
that I also had some of the wisdom whereby she lived her queenly life.
That was about two years after I was first her thrall, and three weary
years have gone by since she began to see in me the enemy of her days.
Now why or wherefore I know not, but it seemeth that it would not avail
her to slay me outright, or suffer me to die; but nought withheld her
from piling up griefs and miseries on my head.  At last she set her
servant, the Dwarf, upon me, even he whose head thou clavest to-day.  Many
things I bore from him whereof it were unseemly for my tongue to tell
before thee; but the time came when he exceeded, and I could bear no
more; and then I showed him this sharp knife (wherewith I would have
thrust me through to the heart if thou hadst not pardoned me e'en now),
and I told him that if he forbore me not, I would slay, not him, but
myself; and this he might not away with because of the commandment of the
Lady, who had given him the word that in any case I must be kept living.
And her hand, withal, fear held somewhat hereafter.  Yet was there need
to me of all my wisdom; for with all this her hatred grew, and whiles
raged within her so furiously that it overmastered her fear, and at such
times she would have put me to death if I had not escaped her by some
turn of my lore."

"Now further, I shall tell thee that somewhat more than a year ago hither
to this land came the King's Son, the second goodly man, as thou art the
third, whom her sorceries have drawn hither since I have dwelt here.
Forsooth, when he first came, he seemed to us, to me, and yet more to my
Lady, to be as beautiful as an angel, and sorely she loved him; and he
her, after his fashion: but he was light-minded, and cold-hearted, and in
a while he must needs turn his eyes upon me, and offer me his love, which
was but foul and unkind as it turned out; for when I nay-said him, as
maybe I had not done save for fear of my Mistress, he had no pity upon
me, but spared not to lead me into the trap of her wrath, and leave me
without help, or a good word.  But, O friend, in spite of all grief and
anguish, I learned still, and waxed wise, and wiser, abiding the day of
my deliverance, which has come, and thou art come."

Therewith she took Walter's hands and kissed them; but he kissed her
face, and her tears wet her lips.  Then she went on: "But sithence,
months ago, the Lady began to weary of this dastard, despite of his
beauty; and then it was thy turn to be swept into her net; I partly guess
how.  For on a day in broad daylight, as I was serving my Mistress in the
hall, and the Evil Thing, whose head is now cloven, was lying across the
threshold of the door, as it were a dream fell upon me, though I strove
to cast it off for fear of chastisement; for the pillared hall wavered,
and vanished from my sight, and my feet were treading a rough stone
pavement instead of the marble wonder of the hall, and there was the
scent of the salt sea and of the tackle of ships, and behind me were tall
houses, and before me the ships indeed, with their ropes beating and
their sails flapping and their masts wavering; and in mine ears was the
hale and how of mariners; things that I had seen and heard in the dimness
of my life gone by."

"And there was I, and the Dwarf before me, and the Lady after me, going
over the gangway aboard of a tall ship, and she gathered way and was
gotten out of the haven, and straightway I saw the mariners cast abroad
their ancient."

Quoth Walter: "What then!  Sawest thou the blazon thereon, of a wolf-like
beast ramping up against a maiden?  And that might well have been thou."

She said: "Yea, so it was; but refrain thee, that I may tell on my tale!
The ship and the sea vanished away, but I was not back in the hall of the
Golden House; and again were we three in the street of the self-same town
which we had but just left; but somewhat dim was my vision thereof, and I
saw little save the door of a goodly house before me, and speedily it
died out, and we were again in the pillared hall, wherein my thralldom
was made manifest."

"Maiden," said Walter, "one question I would ask thee; to wit, didst thou
see me on the quay by the ships?"

"Nay," she said, "there were many folk about, but they were all as images
of the aliens to me.  Now hearken further: three months thereafter came
the dream upon me again, when we were all three together in the Pillared
Hall; and again was the vision somewhat dim.  Once more we were in the
street of a busy town, but all unlike to that other one, and there were
men standing together on our right hands by the door of a house."

"Yea, yea," quoth Walter; "and, forsooth, one of them was who but I."

"Refrain thee, beloved!" she said; "for my tale draweth to its ending,
and I would have thee hearken heedfully: for maybe thou shalt once again
deem my deed past pardon.  Some twenty days after this last dream, I had
some leisure from my Mistress's service, so I went to disport me by the
Well of the Oak-tree (or forsooth she might have set in my mind the
thought of going there, that I might meet thee and give her some occasion
against me); and I sat thereby, nowise loving the earth, but sick at
heart, because of late the King's Son had been more than ever instant
with me to yield him my body, threatening me else with casting me into
all that the worst could do to me of torments and shames day by day.  I
say my heart failed me, and I was wellnigh brought to the point of yea-
saying his desires, that I might take the chance of something befalling
me that were less bad than the worst.  But here must I tell thee a thing,
and pray thee to take it to heart.  This, more than aught else, had given
me strength to nay-say that dastard, that my wisdom both hath been, and
now is, the wisdom of a wise maid, and not of a woman, and all the might
thereof shall I lose with my maidenhead.  Evil wilt thou think of me
then, for all I was tried so sore, that I was at point to cast it all
away, so wretchedly as I shrank from the horror of the Lady's wrath."

"But there as I sat pondering these things, I saw a man coming, and
thought no otherwise thereof but that it was the King's Son, till I saw
the stranger drawing near, and his golden hair, and his grey eyes; and
then I heard his voice, and his kindness pierced my heart, and I knew
that my friend had come to see me; and O, friend, these tears are for the
sweetness of that past hour!"

Said Walter: "I came to see my friend, I also.  Now have I noted what
thou badest me; and I will forbear all as thou commandest me, till we be
safe out of the desert and far away from all evil things; but wilt thou
ban me from all caresses?"

She laughed amidst of her tears, and said: "O, nay, poor lad, if thou
wilt be but wise."

Then she leaned toward him, and took his face betwixt her hands and
kissed him oft, and the tears started in his eyes for love and pity of
her.

Then she said: "Alas, friend! even yet mayst thou doom me guilty, and all
thy love may turn away from me, when I have told thee all that I have
done for the sake of thee and me.  O, if then there might be some
chastisement for the guilty woman, and not mere sundering!"

"Fear nothing, sweetling," said he; "for indeed I deem that already I
know partly what thou hast done."

She sighed, and said: "I will tell thee next, that I banned thy kissing
and caressing of me till to-day because I knew that my Mistress would
surely know if a man, if thou, hadst so much as touched a finger of mine
in love, it was to try me herein that on the morning of the hunting she
kissed and embraced me, till I almost died thereof, and showed thee my
shoulder and my limbs; and to try thee withal, if thine eye should
glister or thy cheek flush thereat; for indeed she was raging in jealousy
of thee.  Next, my friend, even whiles we were talking together at the
Well of the Rock, I was pondering on what we should do to escape from
this land of lies.  Maybe thou wilt say: Why didst thou not take my hand
and flee with me as we fled to-day?  Friend, it is most true, that were
she not dead we had not escaped thus far.  For her trackers would have
followed us, set on by her, and brought us back to an evil fate.
Therefore I tell thee that from the first I did plot the death of those
two, the Dwarf and the Mistress.  For no otherwise mightest thou live, or
I escape from death in life.  But as to the dastard who threatened me
with a thrall's pains, I heeded him nought to live or die, for well I
knew that thy valiant sword, yea, or thy bare hands, would speedily tame
him.  Now first I knew that I must make a show of yielding to the King's
Son; and somewhat how I did therein, thou knowest.  But no night and no
time did I give him to bed me, till after I had met thee as thou wentest
to the Golden House, before the adventure of fetching the lion's skin;
and up to that time I had scarce known what to do, save ever to bid thee,
with sore grief and pain, to yield thee to the wicked woman's desire.  But
as we spake together there by the stream, and I saw that the Evil Thing
(whose head thou clavest e'en now) was spying on us, then amidst the
sickness of terror which ever came over me whensoever I thought of him,
and much more when I saw him (ah! he is dead now!), it came flashing into
my mind how I might destroy my enemy.  Therefore I made the Dwarf my
messenger to her, by bidding thee to my bed in such wise that he might
hear it.  And wot thou well, that he speedily carried her the tidings.
Meanwhile I hastened to lie to the King's Son, and all privily bade him
come to me and not thee.  And thereafter, by dint of waiting and
watching, and taking the only chance that there was, I met thee as thou
camest back from fetching the skin of the lion that never was, and gave
thee that warning, or else had we been undone indeed."

Said Walter: "Was the lion of her making or of thine then?"

She said: "Of hers: why should I deal with such a matter?"

"Yea," said Walter, "but she verily swooned, and she was verily wroth
with the Enemy."

The Maid smiled, and said: "If her lie was not like very sooth, then had
she not been the crafts-master that I knew her: one may lie otherwise
than with the tongue alone: yet indeed her wrath against the Enemy was
nought feigned; for the Enemy was even I, and in these latter days never
did her wrath leave me.  But to go on with my tale."

"Now doubt thou not, that, when thou camest into the hall yester eve, the
Mistress knew of thy counterfeit tryst with me, and meant nought but
death for thee; yet first would she have thee in her arms again,
therefore did she make much of thee at table (and that was partly for my
torment also), and therefore did she make that tryst with thee, and
deemed doubtless that thou wouldst not dare to forgo it, even if thou
shouldst go to me thereafter."

"Now I had trained that dastard to me as I have told thee, but I gave him
a sleepy draught, so that when I came to the bed he might not move toward
me nor open his eyes: but I lay down beside him, so that the Lady might
know that my body had been there; for well had she wotted if it had not.
Then as there I lay I cast over him thy shape, so that none might have
known but that thou wert lying by my side, and there, trembling, I abode
what should befall.  Thus I passed through the hour whenas thou shouldest
have been at her chamber, and the time of my tryst with thee was come as
the Mistress would be deeming; so that I looked for her speedily, and my
heart wellnigh failed me for fear of her cruelty."

"Presently then I heard a stirring in her chamber, and I slipped from out
the bed, and hid me behind the hangings, and was like to die for fear of
her; and lo, presently she came stealing in softly, holding a lamp in one
hand and a knife in the other.  And I tell thee of a sooth that I also
had a sharp knife in my hand to defend my life if need were.  She held
the lamp up above her head before she drew near to the bed-side, and I
heard her mutter: 'She is not there then! but she shall be taken.'  Then
she went up to the bed and stooped over it, and laid her hand on the
place where I had lain; and therewith her eyes turned to that false image
of thee lying there, and she fell a-trembling and shaking, and the lamp
fell to the ground and was quenched (but there was bright moonlight in
the room, and still I could see what betid).  But she uttered a noise
like the low roar of a wild beast, and I saw her arm and hand rise up,
and the flashing of the steel beneath the hand, and then down came the
hand and the steel, and I went nigh to swooning lest perchance I had
wrought over well, and thine image were thy very self.  The dastard died
without a groan: why should I lament him?  I cannot.  But the Lady drew
him toward her, and snatched the clothes from off his shoulders and
breast, and fell a-gibbering sounds mostly without meaning, but broken
here and there with words.  Then I heard her say: 'I shall forget; I
shall forget; and the new days shall come.'  Then was there silence of
her a little, and thereafter she cried out in a terrible voice: 'O no,
no, no!  I cannot forget; I cannot forget;' and she raised a great
wailing cry that filled all the night with horror (didst thou not hear
it?), and caught up the knife from the bed and thrust it into her breast,
and fell down a dead heap over the bed and on to the man whom she had
slain.  And then I thought of thee, and joy smote across my terror; how
shall I gainsay it?  And I fled away to thee, and I took thine hands in
mine, thy dear hands, and we fled away together.  Shall we be still
together?"

He spoke slowly, and touched her not, and she, forbearing all sobbing and
weeping, sat looking wistfully on him.  He said: "I think thou hast told
me all; and whether thy guile slew her, or her own evil heart, she was
slain last night who lay in mine arms the night before.  It was ill, and
ill done of me, for I loved not her, but thee, and I wished for her death
that I might be with thee.  Thou wottest this, and still thou lovest me,
it may be overweeningly.  What have I to say then?  If there be any guilt
of guile, I also was in the guile; and if there be any guilt of murder, I
also was in the murder.  Thus we say to each other; and to God and his
Hallows we say: 'We two have conspired to slay the woman who tormented
one of us, and would have slain the other; and if we have done amiss
therein, then shall we two together pay the penalty; for in this have we
done as one body and one soul.'"

Therewith he put his arms about her and kissed her, but soberly and
friendly, as if he would comfort her.  And thereafter he said to her:
"Maybe to-morrow, in the sunlight, I will ask thee of this woman, what
she verily was; but now let her be.  And thou, thou art over-wearied, and
I bid thee sleep."

So he went about and gathered of bracken a great heap for her bed, and
did his coat thereover, and led her thereto, and she lay down meekly, and
smiled and crossed her arms over her bosom, and presently fell asleep.
But as for him, he watched by the fire-side till dawn began to glimmer,
and then he also laid him down and slept.




CHAPTER XXV: OF THE TRIUMPHANT SUMMER ARRAY OF THE MAID


When the day was bright Walter arose, and met the Maid coming from the
river-bank, fresh and rosy from the water.  She paled a little when they
met face to face, and she shrank from him shyly.  But he took her hand
and kissed her frankly; and the two were glad, and had no need to tell
each other of their joy, though much else they deemed they had to say,
could they have found words thereto.

So they came to their fire and sat down, and fell to breakfast; and ere
they were done, the Maid said: "My Master, thou seest we be come nigh
unto the hill-country, and to-day about sunset, belike, we shall come
into the Land of the Bear-folk; and both it is, that there is peril if we
fall into their hands, and that we may scarce escape them.  Yet I deem
that we may deal with the peril by wisdom."

"What is the peril?" said Walter; "I mean, what is the worst of it?"

Said the Maid: "To be offered up in sacrifice to their God."

"But if we escape death at their hands, what then?" said Walter.

"One of two things," said she; "the first that they shall take us into
their tribe."

"And will they sunder us in that case?" said Walter.

"Nay," said she.

Walter laughed and said: "Therein is little harm then.  But what is the
other chance?"

Said she: "That we leave them with their goodwill, and come back to one
of the lands of Christendom."

Said Walter: "I am not all so sure that this is the better of the two
choices, though, forsooth, thou seemest to think so.  But tell me now,
what like is their God, that they should offer up new-comers to him?"

"Their God is a woman," she said, "and the Mother of their nation and
tribes (or so they deem) before the days when they had chieftains and
Lords of Battle."

"That will be long ago," said he; "how then may she be living now?"

Said the Maid: "Doubtless that woman of yore agone is dead this many and
many a year; but they take to them still a new woman, one after other, as
they may happen on them, to be in the stead of the Ancient Mother.  And
to tell thee the very truth right out, she that lieth dead in the
Pillared Hall was even the last of these; and now, if they knew it, they
lack a God.  This shall we tell them."

"Yea, yea!" said Walter, "a goodly welcome shall we have of them then, if
we come amongst them with our hands red with the blood of their God!"

She smiled on him and said: "If I come amongst them with the tidings that
I have slain her, and they trow therein, without doubt they shall make me
Lady and Goddess in her stead."

"This is a strange word," said Walter "but if so they do, how shall that
further us in reaching the kindreds of the world, and the folk of Holy
Church?"

She laughed outright, so joyous was she grown, now that she knew that his
life was yet to be a part of hers.  "Sweetheart," she said, "now I see
that thou desirest wholly what I desire; yet in any case, abiding with
them would be living and not dying, even as thou hadst it e'en now.  But,
forsooth, they will not hinder our departure if they deem me their God;
they do not look for it, nor desire it, that their God should dwell with
them daily.  Have no fear."  Then she laughed again, and said: "What!
thou lookest on me and deemest me to be but a sorry image of a goddess;
and me with my scanty coat and bare arms and naked feet!  But wait!  I
know well how to array me when the time cometh.  Thou shalt see it!  And
now, my Master, were it not meet that we took to the road?"

So they arose, and found a ford of the river that took the Maid but to
the knee, and so set forth up the greensward of the slopes whereas there
were but few trees; so went they faring toward the hill-country.

At the last they were come to the feet of the very hills, and in the
hollows betwixt the buttresses of them grew nut and berry trees, and the
greensward round about them was both thick and much flowery.  There they
stayed them and dined, whereas Walter had shot a hare by the way, and
they had found a bubbling spring under a grey stone in a bight of the
coppice, wherein now the birds were singing their best.

When they had eaten and had rested somewhat, the Maid arose and said:
"Now shall the Queen array herself, and seem like a very goddess."

Then she fell to work, while Walter looked on; and she made a garland for
her head of eglantine where the roses were the fairest; and with mingled
flowers of the summer she wreathed her middle about, and let the garland
of them hang down to below her knees; and knots of the flowers she made
fast to the skirts of her coat, and did them for arm-rings about her
arms, and for anklets and sandals for her feet.  Then she set a garland
about Walter's head, and then stood a little off from him and set her
feet together, and lifted up her arms, and said: "Lo now! am I not as
like to the Mother of Summer as if I were clad in silk and gold? and even
so shall I be deemed by the folk of the Bear.  Come now, thou shalt see
how all shall be well."

She laughed joyously; but he might scarce laugh for pity of his love.
Then they set forth again, and began to climb the hills, and the hours
wore as they went in sweet converse; till at last Walter looked on the
Maid, and smiled on her, and said: "One thing I would say to thee, lovely
friend, to wit: wert thou clad in silk and gold, thy stately raiment
might well suffer a few stains, or here and there a rent maybe; but
stately would it be still when the folk of the Bear should come up
against thee.  But as to this flowery array of thine, in a few hours it
shall be all faded and nought.  Nay, even now, as I look on thee, the
meadow-sweet that hangeth from thy girdle-stead has waxen dull, and
welted; and the blossoming eyebright that is for a hem to the little
white coat of thee is already forgetting how to be bright and blue.  What
sayest thou then?"

She laughed at his word, and stood still, and looked back over her
shoulder, while with her fingers she dealt with the flowers about her
side like to a bird preening his feathers.  Then she said: "Is it verily
so as thou sayest?  Look again!"

So he looked, and wondered; for lo! beneath his eyes the spires of the
meadow-sweet grew crisp and clear again, the eyebright blossoms shone
once more over the whiteness of her legs; the eglantine roses opened, and
all was as fresh and bright as if it were still growing on its own roots.

He wondered, and was even somedeal aghast; but she said: "Dear friend, be
not troubled! did I not tell thee that I am wise in hidden lore?  But in
my wisdom shall be no longer any scathe to any man.  And again, this my
wisdom, as I told thee erst, shall end on the day whereon I am made all
happy.  And it is thou that shall wield it all, my Master.  Yet must my
wisdom needs endure for a little season yet.  Let us on then, boldly and
happily."




CHAPTER XXVI: THEY COME TO THE FOLK OF THE BEARS


On they went, and before long they were come up on to the down-country,
where was scarce a tree, save gnarled and knotty thorn-bushes here and
there, but nought else higher than the whin.  And here on these upper
lands they saw that the pastures were much burned with the drought,
albeit summer was not worn old.  Now they went making due south toward
the mountains, whose heads they saw from time to time rising deep blue
over the bleak greyness of the down-land ridges.  And so they went, till
at last, hard on sunset, after they had climbed long over a high bent,
they came to the brow thereof, and, looking down, beheld new tidings.

There was a wide valley below them, greener than the downs which they had
come over, and greener yet amidmost, from the watering of a stream which,
all beset with willows, wound about the bottom.  Sheep and neat were
pasturing about the dale, and moreover a long line of smoke was going up
straight into the windless heavens from the midst of a ring of little
round houses built of turfs, and thatched with reed.  And beyond that,
toward an eastward-lying bight of the dale, they could see what looked
like to a doom-ring of big stones, though there were no rocky places in
that land.  About the cooking-fire amidst of the houses, and here and
there otherwhere, they saw, standing or going to and fro, huge figures of
men and women, with children playing about betwixt them.

They stood and gazed down at it for a minute or two, and though all were
at peace there, yet to Walter, at least, it seemed strange and awful.  He
spake softly, as though he would not have his voice reach those men,
though they were, forsooth, out of earshot of anything save a shout: "Are
these then the children of the Bear?  What shall we do now?"

She said: "Yea, of the Bear they be, though there be other folks of them
far and far away to the northward and eastward, near to the borders of
the sea.  And as to what we shall do, let us go down at once, and
peacefully.  Indeed, by now there will be no escape from them; for lo
you! they have seen us."

Forsooth, some three or four of the big men had turned them toward the
bent whereon stood the twain, and were hailing them in huge, rough
voices, wherein, howsoever, seemed to be no anger or threat.  So the Maid
took Walter by the hand, and thus they went down quietly, and the Bear-
folk, seeing them, stood all together, facing them, to abide their
coming.  Walter saw of them, that though they were very tall and bigly
made, they were not so far above the stature of men as to be marvels.  The
carles were long-haired, and shaggy of beard, and their hair all red or
tawny; their skins, where their naked flesh showed, were burned brown
with sun and weather, but to a fair and pleasant brown, nought like to
blackamoors.  The queans were comely and well-eyed; nor was there
anything of fierce or evil-looking about either the carles or the queans,
but somewhat grave and solemn of aspect were they.  Clad were they all,
saving the young men-children, but somewhat scantily, and in nought save
sheep-skins or deer-skins.

For weapons they saw amongst them clubs, and spears headed with bone or
flint, and ugly axes of big flints set in wooden handles; nor was there,
as far as they could see, either now or afterward, any bow amongst them.
But some of the young men seemed to have slings done about their
shoulders.

Now when they were come but three fathom from them, the Maid lifted up
her voice, and spake clearly and sweetly: "Hail, ye folk of the Bears! we
have come amongst you, and that for your good and not for your hurt:
wherefore we would know if we be welcome."

There was an old man who stood foremost in the midst, clad in a mantle of
deer-skins worked very goodly, and with a gold ring on his arm, and a
chaplet of blue stones on his head, and he spake: "Little are ye, but so
goodly, that if ye were but bigger, we should deem that ye were come from
the Gods' House.  Yet have I heard, that how mighty soever may the Gods
be, and chiefly our God, they be at whiles nought so bigly made as we of
the Bears.  How this may be, I wot not.  But if ye be not of the Gods or
their kindred, then are ye mere aliens; and we know not what to do with
aliens, save we meet them in battle, or give them to the God, or save we
make them children of the Bear.  But yet again, ye may be messengers of
some folk who would bind friendship and alliance with us: in which case
ye shall at the least depart in peace, and whiles ye are with us shall be
our guests in all good cheer.  Now, therefore, we bid you declare the
matter unto us."

Then spake the Maid: "Father, it were easy for us to declare what we be
unto you here present.  But, meseemeth, ye who be gathered round the fire
here this evening are less than the whole tale of the children of the
Bear."

"So it is, Maiden," said the elder, "that many more children hath the
Bear."

"This then we bid you," said the Maid, "that ye send the tokens round and
gather your people to you, and when they be assembled in the Doom-ring,
then shall we put our errand before you; and according to that, shall ye
deal with us."

"Thou hast spoken well," said the elder; "and even so had we bidden you
ourselves.  To-morrow, before noon, shall ye stand in the Doom-ring in
this Dale, and speak with the children of the Bear."

Therewith he turned to his own folk and called out something, whereof
those twain knew not the meaning; and there came to him, one after
another, six young men, unto each of whom he gave a thing from out his
pouch, but what it was Walter might not see, save that it was little and
of small account: to each, also, he spake a word or two, and straight
they set off running, one after the other, turning toward the bent which
was over against that whereby the twain had come into the Dale, and were
soon out of sight in the gathering dusk.

Then the elder turned him again to Walter and the Maid, and spake: "Man
and woman, whatsoever ye may be, or whatsoever may abide you to-morrow,
to-night, ye are welcome guests to us; so we bid you come eat and drink
at our fire."

So they sat all together upon the grass round about the embers of the
fire, and ate curds and cheese, and drank milk in abundance; and as the
night grew on them they quickened the fire, that they might have light.
This wild folk talked merrily amongst themselves, with laughter enough
and friendly jests, but to the new-comers they were few-spoken, though,
as the twain deemed, for no enmity that they bore them.  But this found
Walter, that the younger ones, both men and women, seemed to find it a
hard matter to keep their eyes off them; and seemed, withal, to gaze on
them with somewhat of doubt, or, it might be, of fear.

So when the night was wearing a little, the elder arose and bade the
twain to come with him, and led them to a small house or booth, which was
amidmost of all, and somewhat bigger than the others, and he did them to
wit that they should rest there that night, and bade them sleep in peace
and without fear till the morrow.  So they entered, and found beds
thereon of heather and ling, and they laid them down sweetly, like
brother and sister, when they had kissed each other.  But they noted that
four brisk men lay without the booth, and across the door, with their
weapons beside them, so that they must needs look upon themselves as
captives.

Then Walter might not refrain him, but spake: "Sweet and dear friend, I
have come a long way from the quay at Langton, and the vision of the
Dwarf, the Maid, and the Lady; and for this kiss wherewith I have kissed
thee e'en now, and the kindness of thine eyes, it was worth the time and
the travail.  But to-morrow, meseemeth, I shall go no further in this
world, though my journey be far longer than from Langton hither.  And now
may God and All Hallows keep thee amongst this wild folk, whenas I shall
be gone from thee."

She laughed low and sweetly, and said: "Dear friend, dost thou speak to
me thus mournfully to move me to love thee better?  Then is thy labour
lost; for no better may I love thee than now I do; and that is with mine
whole heart.  But keep a good courage, I bid thee; for we be not sundered
yet, nor shall we be.  Nor do I deem that we shall die here, or
to-morrow; but many years hence, after we have known all the sweetness of
life.  Meanwhile, I bid thee good-night, fair friend!"




CHAPTER XXVII: MORNING AMONGST THE BEARS


So Walter laid him down and fell asleep, and knew no more till he awoke
in bright daylight with the Maid standing over him.  She was fresh from
the water, for she had been to the river to bathe her, and the sun
through the open door fell streaming on her feet close to Walter's
pillow.  He turned about and cast his arm about them, and caressed them,
while she stood smiling upon him; then he arose and looked on her, and
said: "How thou art fair and bright this morning!  And yet . . . and yet
. . . were it not well that thou do off thee all this faded and drooping
bravery of leaves and blossoms, that maketh thee look like to a
jongleur's damsel on a morrow of May-day?"

And he gazed ruefully on her.

She laughed on him merrily, and said: "Yea, and belike these others think
no better of my attire, or not much better; for yonder they are gathering
small wood for the burnt-offering; which, forsooth, shall be thou and I,
unless I better it all by means of the wisdom I learned of the old woman,
and perfected betwixt the stripes of my Mistress, whom a little while ago
thou lovedst somewhat."

And as she spake her eyes sparkled, her cheek flushed, and her limbs and
her feet seemed as if they could scarce refrain from dancing for joy.
Then Walter knit his brow, and for a moment a thought half-framed was in
his mind: Is it so, that she will bewray me and live without me? and he
cast his eyes on to the ground.  But she said: "Look up, and into mine
eyes, friend, and see if there be in them any falseness toward thee!  For
I know thy thought; I know thy thought.  Dost thou not see that my joy
and gladness is for the love of thee, and the thought of the rest from
trouble that is at hand?"

He looked up, and his eyes met the eyes of her love, and he would have
cast his arms about her; but she drew aback and said: "Nay, thou must
refrain thee awhile, dear friend, lest these folk cast eyes on us, and
deem us over lover-like for what I am to bid them deem me.  Abide a
while, and then shall all be in me according to thy will.  But now I must
tell thee that it is not very far from noon, and that the Bears are
streaming into the Dale, and already there is an host of men at the Doom-
ring, and, as I said, the bale for the burnt-offering is wellnigh dight,
whether it be for us, or for some other creature.  And now I have to bid
thee this, and it will be a thing easy for thee to do, to wit, that thou
look as if thou wert of the race of the Gods, and not to blench, or show
sign of blenching, whatever betide: to yea-say both my yea-say and my nay-
say: and lastly this, which is the only hard thing for thee (but thou
hast already done it before somewhat), to look upon me with no masterful
eyes of love, nor as if thou wert at once praying me and commanding me;
rather thou shalt so demean thee as if thou wert my man all simply, and
nowise my master."

"O friend beloved," said Walter, "here at least art thou the master, and
I will do all thy bidding, in certain hope of this, that either we shall
live together or die together."

But as they spoke, in came the elder, and with him a young maiden,
bearing with them their breakfast of curds arid cream and strawberries,
and he bade them eat.  So they ate, and were not unmerry; and the while
of their eating the elder talked with them soberly, but not hardly, or
with any seeming enmity: and ever his talk gat on to the drought, which
was now burning up the down-pastures; and how the grass in the watered
dales, which was no wide spread of land, would not hold out much longer
unless the God sent them rain.  And Walter noted that those two, the
elder and the Maid, eyed each other curiously amidst of this talk; the
elder intent on what she might say, and if she gave heed to his words;
while on her side the Maid answered his speech graciously and pleasantly,
but said little that was of any import: nor would she have him fix her
eyes, which wandered lightly from this thing to that; nor would her lips
grow stern and stable, but ever smiled in answer to the light of her
eyes, as she sat there with her face as the very face of the gladness of
the summer day.




CHAPTER XXVIII: OF THE NEW GOD OF THE BEARS


At last the old man said: "My children, ye shall now come with me unto
the Doom-ring of our folk, the Bears of the Southern Dales, and deliver
to them your errand; and I beseech you to have pity upon your own bodies,
as I have pity on them; on thine especially, Maiden, so fair and bright a
creature as thou art; for so it is, that if ye deal us out light and
lying words after the manner of dastards, ye shall miss the worship and
glory of wending away amidst of the flames, a gift to the God and a hope
to the people, and shall be passed by the rods of the folk, until ye
faint and fail amongst them, and then shall ye be thrust down into the
flow at the Dale's End, and a stone-laden hurdle cast upon you, that we
may thenceforth forget your folly."

The Maid now looked full into his eyes, and Walter deemed that the old
man shrank before her; but she said: "Thou art old and wise, O great man
of the Bears, yet nought I need to learn of thee.  Now lead us on our way
to the Stead of the Errands."

So the elder brought them along to the Doom-ring at the eastern end of
the Dale; and it was now all peopled with those huge men, weaponed after
their fashion, and standing up, so that the grey stones thereof but
showed a little over their heads.  But amidmost of the said Ring was a
big stone, fashioned as a chair, whereon sat a very old man, long-hoary
and white-bearded, and on either side of him stood a great-limbed woman
clad in war-gear, holding, each of them, a long spear, and with a flint-
bladed knife in the girdle; and there were no other women in all the
Mote.

Then the elder led those twain into the midst of the Mote, and there bade
them go up on to a wide, flat-topped stone, six feet above the ground,
just over against the ancient chieftain; and they mounted it by a rough
stair, and stood there before that folk; Walter in his array of the
outward world, which had been fair enough, of crimson cloth and silk, and
white linen, but was now travel-stained and worn; and the Maid with
nought upon her, save the smock wherein she had fled from the Golden
House of the Wood beyond the World, decked with the faded flowers which
she had wreathed about her yesterday.  Nevertheless, so it was, that
those big men eyed her intently, and with somewhat of worship.

Now did Walter, according to her bidding, sink down on his knees beside
her, and drawing his sword, hold it before him, as if to keep all
interlopers aloof from the Maid.  And there was silence in the Mote, and
all eyes were fixed on those twain.

At last the old chief arose and spake: "Ye men, here are come a man and a
woman, we know not whence; whereas they have given word to our folk who
first met them, that they would tell their errand to none save the Mote
of the People; which it was their due to do, if they were minded to risk
it.  For either they be aliens without an errand hither, save, it may be,
to beguile us, in which case they shall presently die an evil death; or
they have come amongst us that we may give them to the God with flint-
edge and fire; or they have a message to us from some folk or other, on
the issue of which lieth life or death.  Now shall ye hear what they have
to say concerning themselves and their faring hither.  But, meseemeth, it
shall be the woman who is the chief and hath the word in her mouth; for,
lo you! the man kneeleth at her feet, as one who would serve and worship
her.  Speak out then, woman, and let our warriors hear thee."

Then the Maid lifted up her voice, and spake out clear and shrilling,
like to a flute of the best of the minstrels: "Ye men of the Children of
the Bear, I would ask you a question, and let the chieftain who sitteth
before me answer it."

The old man nodded his head, and she went on: "Tell me, Children of the
Bear, how long a time is worn since ye saw the God of your worship made
manifest in the body of a woman!"

Said the elder: "Many winters have worn since my father's father was a
child, and saw the very God in the bodily form of a woman."

Then she said again: "Did ye rejoice at her coming, and would ye rejoice
if once more she came amongst you?"

"Yea," said the old chieftain, "for she gave us gifts, and learned us
lore, and came to us in no terrible shape, but as a young woman as goodly
as thou."

Then said the Maid: "Now, then, is the day of your gladness come; for the
old body is dead, and I am the new body of your God, come amongst you for
your welfare."

Then fell a great silence on the Mote, till the old man spake and said:
"What shall I say and live?  For if thou be verily the God, and I
threaten thee, wilt thou not destroy me?  But thou hast spoken a great
word with a sweet mouth, and hast taken the burden of blood on thy lily
hands; and if the Children of the Bear be befooled of light liars, how
shall they put the shame off them?  Therefore I say, show to us a token;
and if thou be the God, this shall be easy to thee; and if thou show it
not, then is thy falsehood manifest, and thou shalt dree the weird.  For
we shall deliver thee into the hands of these women here, who shall
thrust thee down into the flow which is hereby, after they have wearied
themselves with whipping thee.  But thy man that kneeleth at thy feet
shall we give to the true God, and he shall go to her by the road of the
flint and the fire.  Hast thou heard?  Then give to us the sign and the
token."

She changed countenance no whit at his word; but her eyes were the
brighter, and her cheek the fresher and her feet moved a little, as if
they were growing glad before the dance; and she looked out over the
Mote, and spake in her clear voice: "Old man, thou needest not to fear
for thy words.  Forsooth it is not me whom thou threatenest with stripes
and a foul death, but some light fool and liar, who is not here.  Now
hearken!  I wot well that ye would have somewhat of me, to wit, that I
should send you rain to end this drought, which otherwise seemeth like to
lie long upon you: but this rain, I must go into the mountains of the
south to fetch it you; therefore shall certain of your warriors bring me
on my way, with this my man, up to the great pass of the said mountains,
and we shall set out thitherward this very day."

She was silent a while, and all looked on her, but none spake or moved,
so that they seemed as images of stone amongst the stones.

Then she spake again and said: "Some would say, men of the Bear, that
this were a sign and a token great enough; but I know you, and how
stubborn and perverse of heart ye be; and how that the gift not yet
within your hand is no gift to you; and the wonder ye see not, your
hearts trow not.  Therefore look ye upon me as here I stand, I who have
come from the fairer country and the greenwood of the lands, and see if I
bear not the summer with me, and the heart that maketh increase and the
hand that giveth."

Lo then! as she spake, the faded flowers that hung about her gathered
life and grew fresh again; the woodbine round her neck and her sleek
shoulders knit itself together and embraced her freshly, and cast its
scent about her face.  The lilies that girded her loins lifted up their
heads, and the gold of their tassels fell upon her; the eyebright grew
clean blue again upon her smock; the eglantine found its blooms again,
and then began to shed the leaves thereof upon her feet; the meadow-sweet
wreathed amongst it made clear the sweetness of her legs, and the mouse-
ear studded her raiment as with gems.  There she stood amidst of the
blossoms, like a great orient pearl against the fretwork of the
goldsmiths, and the breeze that came up the valley from behind bore the
sweetness of her fragrance all over the Man-mote.

Then, indeed, the Bears stood up, and shouted and cried, and smote on
their shields, and tossed their spears aloft.  Then the elder rose from
his seat, and came up humbly to where she stood, and prayed her to say
what she would have done; while the others drew about in knots, but durst
not come very nigh to her.  She answered the ancient chief, and said,
that she would depart presently toward the mountains, whereby she might
send them the rain which they lacked, and that thence she would away to
the southward for a while; but that they should hear of her, or, it might
be, see her, before they who were now of middle age should be gone to
their fathers.

Then the old man besought her that they might make her a litter of
fragrant green boughs, and so bear her away toward the mountain pass
amidst a triumph of the whole folk.  But she leapt lightly down from the
stone, and walked to and fro on the greensward, while it seemed of her
that her feet scarce touched the grass; and she spake to the ancient
chief where he still kneeled in worship of her, and said "Nay; deemest
thou of me that I need bearing by men's hands, or that I shall tire at
all when I am doing my will, and I, the very heart of the year's
increase?  So it is, that the going of my feet over your pastures shall
make them to thrive, both this year and the coming years: surely will I
go afoot."

So they worshipped her the more, and blessed her; and then first of all
they brought meat, the daintiest they might, both for her and for Walter.
But they would not look on the Maid whiles she ate, or suffer Walter to
behold her the while.  Afterwards, when they had eaten, some twenty men,
weaponed after their fashion, made them ready to wend with the Maiden up
into the mountains, and anon they set out thitherward all together.
Howbeit, the huge men held them ever somewhat aloof from the Maid; and
when they came to the resting-place for that night, where was no house,
for it was up amongst the foot-hills before the mountains, then it was a
wonder to see how carefully they built up a sleeping-place for her, and
tilted it over with their skin-cloaks, and how they watched nightlong
about her.  But Walter they let sleep peacefully on the grass, a little
way aloof from the watchers round the Maid.




CHAPTER XXIX: WALTER STRAYS IN THE PASS AND IS SUNDERED FROM THE MAID


Morning came, and they arose and went on their ways, and went all day
till the sun was nigh set, and they were come up into the very pass; and
in the jaws thereof was an earthen howe.  There the Maid bade them stay,
and she went up on to the howe, and stood there and spake to them, and
said: "O men of the Bear, I give you thanks for your following, and I
bless you, and promise you the increase of the earth.  But now ye shall
turn aback, and leave me to go my ways; and my man with the iron sword
shall follow me.  Now, maybe, I shall come amongst the Bear-folk again
before long, and yet again, and learn them wisdom; but for this time it
is enough.  And I shall tell you that ye were best to hasten home
straightway to your houses in the downland dales, for the weather which I
have bidden for you is even now coming forth from the forge of storms in
the heart of the mountains.  Now this last word I give you, that times
are changed since I wore the last shape of God that ye have seen,
wherefore a change I command you.  If so be aliens come amongst you, I
will not that ye send them to me by the flint and the fire; rather,
unless they be baleful unto you, and worthy of an evil death, ye shall
suffer them to abide with you; ye shall make them become children of the
Bears, if they be goodly enough and worthy, and they shall be my children
as ye be; otherwise, if they be ill-favoured and weakling, let them live
and be thralls to you, but not join with you, man to woman.  Now depart
ye with my blessing."

Therewith she came down from the mound, and went her ways up the pass so
lightly, that it was to Walter, standing amongst the Bears, as if she had
vanished away.  But the men of that folk abode standing and worshipping
their God for a little while, and that while he durst not sunder him from
their company.  But when they had blessed him and gone on their way
backward, he betook him in haste to following the Maid, thinking to find
her abiding him in some nook of the pass.

Howsoever, it was now twilight or more, and, for all his haste, dark
night overtook him, so that perforce he was stayed amidst the tangle of
the mountain ways.  And, moreover, ere the night was grown old, the
weather came upon him on the back of a great south wind, so that the
mountain nooks rattled and roared, and there was the rain and the hail,
with thunder and lightning, monstrous and terrible, and all the huge
array of a summer storm.  So he was driven at last to crouch under a big
rock and abide the day.

But not so were his troubles at an end.  For under the said rock he fell
asleep, and when he awoke it was day indeed; but as to the pass, the way
thereby was blind with the driving rain and the lowering lift; so that,
though he struggled as well as he might against the storm and the tangle,
he made but little way.

And now once more the thought came on him, that the Maid was of the fays,
or of some race even mightier; and it came on him now not as erst, with
half fear and whole desire, but with a bitter oppression of dread, of
loss and misery; so that he began to fear that she had but won his love
to leave him and forget him for a new-comer, after the wont of fay-women,
as old tales tell.

Two days he battled thus with storm and blindness, and wanhope of his
life; for he was growing weak and fordone.  But the third morning the
storm abated, though the rain yet fell heavily, and he could see his way
somewhat as well as feel it: withal he found that now his path was
leading him downwards.  As it grew dusk, he came down into a grassy
valley with a stream running through it to the southward, and the rain
was now but little, coming down but in dashes from time to time.  So he
crept down to the stream-side, and lay amongst the bushes there; and said
to himself, that on the morrow he would get him victual, so that he might
live to seek his Maiden through the wide world.  He was of somewhat
better heart: but now that he was laid quiet, and had no more for that
present to trouble him about the way, the anguish of his loss fell upon
him the keener, and he might not refrain him from lamenting his dear
Maiden aloud, as one who deemed himself in the empty wilderness: and thus
he lamented for her sweetness and her loveliness, and the kindness of her
voice and her speech, and her mirth.  Then he fell to crying out
concerning the beauty of her shaping, praising the parts of her body, as
her face, and her hands, and her shoulders, and her feet, and cursing the
evil fate which had sundered him from the friendliness of her, and the
peerless fashion of her.




CHAPTER XXX: NOW THEY MEET AGAIN


Complaining thus-wise, he fell asleep from sheer weariness, and when he
awoke it was broad day, calm and bright and cloudless, with the scent of
the earth refreshed going up into the heavens, and the birds singing
sweetly in the bushes about him: for the dale whereunto he was now come
was a fair and lovely place amidst the shelving slopes of the mountains,
a paradise of the wilderness, and nought but pleasant and sweet things
were to be seen there, now that the morn was so clear and sunny.

He arose and looked about him, and saw where, a hundred yards aloof, was
a thicket of small wood, as thorn and elder and whitebeam, all wreathed
about with the bines of wayfaring tree; it hid a bight of the stream,
which turned round about it, and betwixt it and Walter was the grass
short and thick, and sweet, and all beset with flowers; and he said to
himself that it was even such a place as wherein the angels were leading
the Blessed in the great painted paradise in the choir of the big church
at Langton on Holm.  But lo! as he looked he cried aloud for joy, for
forth from the thicket on to the flowery grass came one like to an angel
from out of the said picture, white-clad and bare-foot, sweet of flesh,
with bright eyes and ruddy cheeks; for it was the Maid herself.  So he
ran to her, and she abode him, holding forth kind hands to him, and
smiling, while she wept for joy of the meeting.  He threw himself upon
her, and spared not to kiss her, her cheeks and her mouth, and her arms
and her shoulders, and wheresoever she would suffer it.  Till at last she
drew aback a little, laughing on him for love, and said: "Forbear now,
friend, for it is enough for this time, and tell me how thou hast sped."

"Ill, ill," said he.

"What ails thee?" she said.

"Hunger," he said, "and longing for thee."

"Well," she said, "me thou hast; there is one ill quenched; take my hand,
and we will see to the other one."

So he took her hand, and to hold it seemed to him sweet beyond measure.
But he looked up, and saw a little blue smoke going up into the air from
beyond the thicket; and he laughed, for he was weak with hunger, and he
said: "Who is at the cooking yonder?"

"Thou shalt see," she said; and led him therewith into the said thicket
and through it, and lo! a fair little grassy place, full of flowers,
betwixt the bushes and the bight of the stream; and on the little sandy
ere, just off the greensward, was a fire of sticks, and beside it two
trouts lying, fat and red-flecked.

"Here is the breakfast," said she; "when it was time to wash the night
off me e'en now, I went down the strand here into the rippling shallow,
and saw the bank below it, where the water draws together yonder, and
deepens, that it seemed like to hold fish; and whereas I looked to meet
thee presently, I groped the bank for them, going softly; and lo thou!
Help me now, that we cook them."

So they roasted them on the red embers, and fell to and ate well, both of
them, and drank of the water of the stream out of each other's hollow
hands; and that feast seemed glorious to them, such gladness went with
it.

But when they were done with their meat, Walter said to the Maid: "And
how didst thou know that thou shouldst see me presently?"

She said, looking on him wistfully: "This needed no wizardry.  I lay not
so far from thee last night, but that I heard thy voice and knew it."

Said he, "Why didst thou not come to me then, since thou heardest me
bemoaning thee?"

She cast her eyes down, and plucked at the flowers and grass, and said:
"It was dear to hear thee praising me; I knew not before that I was so
sore desired, or that thou hadst taken such note of my body, and found it
so dear."

Then she reddened sorely, and said: "I knew not that aught of me had such
beauty as thou didst bewail."

And she wept for joy.  Then she looked on him and smiled, and said: "Wilt
thou have the very truth of it?  I went close up to thee, and stood there
hidden by the bushes and the night.  And amidst thy bewailing, I knew
that thou wouldst soon fall asleep, and in sooth I out-waked thee."

Then was she silent again; and he spake not, but looked on her shyly; and
she said, reddening yet more: "Furthermore, I must needs tell thee that I
feared to go to thee in the dark night, and my heart so yearning towards
thee."

And she hung her head adown; but he said: "Is it so indeed, that thou
fearest me?  Then doth that make me afraid--afraid of thy nay-say.  For I
was going to entreat thee, and say to thee: Beloved, we have now gone
through many troubles; let us now take a good reward at once, and wed
together, here amidst this sweet and pleasant house of the mountains, ere
we go further on our way; if indeed we go further at all.  For where
shall we find any place sweeter or happier than this?"

But she sprang up to her feet, and stood there trembling before him,
because of her love; and she said: "Beloved, I have deemed that it were
good for us to go seek mankind as they live in the world, and to live
amongst them.  And as for me, I will tell thee the sooth, to wit, that I
long for this sorely.  For I feel afraid in the wilderness, and as if I
needed help and protection against my Mistress, though she be dead; and I
need the comfort of many people, and the throngs of the cities.  I cannot
forget her: it was but last night that I dreamed (I suppose as the dawn
grew a-cold) that I was yet under her hand, and she was stripping me for
the torment; so that I woke up panting and crying out.  I pray thee be
not angry with me for telling thee of my desires; for if thou wouldst not
have it so, then here will I abide with thee as thy mate, and strive to
gather courage."

He rose up and kissed her face, and said: "Nay, I had in sooth no mind to
abide here for ever; I meant but that we should feast a while here, and
then depart: sooth it is, that if thou dreadest the wilderness, somewhat
I dread the city."

She turned pale, and said: "Thou shalt have thy will, my friend, if it
must be so.  But bethink thee we be not yet at our journey's end, and may
have many things and much strife to endure, before we be at peace and in
welfare.  Now shall I tell thee--did I not before?--that while I am a
maid untouched, my wisdom, and somedeal of might, abideth with me, and
only so long.  Therefore I entreat thee, let us go now, side by side, out
of this fair valley, even as we are, so that my wisdom and might may help
thee at need.  For, my friend, I would not that our lives be short, so
much of joy as hath now come into them."

"Yea, beloved," he said, "let us on straightway then, and shorten the
while that sundereth us."

"Love," she said, "thou shalt pardon me one time for all.  But this is to
be said, that I know somewhat of the haps that lie a little way ahead of
us; partly by my lore, and partly by what I learned of this land of the
wild folk whiles thou wert lying asleep that morning."

So they left that pleasant place by the water, and came into the open
valley, and went their ways through the pass; and it soon became stony
again, as they mounted the bent which went up from out the dale.  And
when they came to the brow of the said bent, they had a sight of the open
country lying fair and joyous in the sunshine, and amidst of it, against
the blue hills, the walls and towers of a great city.

Then said the Maid: "O, dear friend, lo you! is not that our abode that
lieth yonder, and is so beauteous?  Dwell not our friends there, and our
protection against uncouth wights, and mere evil things in guileful
shapes?  O city, I bid thee hail!"

But Walter looked on her, and smiled somewhat; and said: "I rejoice in
thy joy.  But there be evil things in yonder city also, though they be
not fays nor devils, or it is like to no city that I wot of.  And in
every city shall foes grow up to us without rhyme or reason, and life
therein shall be tangled unto us."

"Yea," she said; "but in the wilderness amongst the devils, what was to
be done by manly might or valiancy?  There hadst thou to fall back upon
the guile and wizardry which I had filched from my very foes.  But when
we come down yonder, then shall thy valiancy prevail to cleave the tangle
for us.  Or at the least, it shall leave a tale of thee behind, and I
shall worship thee."

He laughed, and his face grew brighter: "Mastery mows the meadow," quoth
he, "and one man is of little might against many.  But I promise thee I
shall not be slothful before thee."




CHAPTER XXXI: THEY COME UPON NEW FOLK


With that they went down from the bent again, and came to where the pass
narrowed so much, that they went betwixt a steep wall of rock on either
side; but after an hour's going, the said wall gave back suddenly, and,
or they were ware almost, they came on another dale like to that which
they had left, but not so fair, though it was grassy and well watered,
and not so big either.  But here indeed befell a change to them; for lo!
tents and pavilions pitched in the said valley, and amidst of it a throng
of men, mostly weaponed, and with horses ready saddled at hand.  So they
stayed their feet, and Walter's heart failed him, for he said to himself:
Who wotteth what these men may be, save that they be aliens?  It is most
like that we shall be taken as thralls; and then, at the best, we shall
be sundered; and that is all one with the worst.

But the Maid, when she saw the horses, and the gay tents, and the pennons
fluttering, and the glitter of spears, and gleaming of white armour,
smote her palms together for joy, and cried out: "Here now are come the
folk of the city for our welcoming, and fair and lovely are they, and of
many things shall they be thinking, and a many things shall they do, and
we shall be partakers thereof.  Come then, and let us meet them, fair
friend!"

But Walter said: "Alas! thou knowest not: would that we might flee!  But
now is it over late; so put we a good face on it, and go to them quietly,
as erewhile we did in the Bear-country."

So did they; and there sundered six from the men-at-arms and came to
those twain, and made humble obeisance to Walter, but spake no word.  Then
they made as they would lead them to the others, and the twain went with
them wondering, and came into the ring of men-at-arms, and stood before
an old hoar knight, armed all, save his head, with most goodly armour,
and he also bowed before Walter, but spake no word.  Then they took them
to the master pavilion, and made signs to them to sit, and they brought
them dainty meat and good wine.  And the while of their eating arose up a
stir about them; and when they were done with their meat, the ancient
knight came to them, still bowing in courteous wise, and did them to wit
by signs that they should depart: and when they were without, they saw
all the other tents struck, and men beginning to busy them with striking
the pavilion, and the others mounted and ranked in good order for the
road; and there were two horse-litters before them, wherein they were
bidden to mount, Walter in one, and the Maid in the other, and no
otherwise might they do.  Then presently was a horn blown, and all took
to the road together; and Walter saw betwixt the curtains of the litter
that men-at-arms rode on either side of him, albeit they had left him his
sword by his side.

So they went down the mountain-passes, and before sunset were gotten into
the plain; but they made no stay for nightfall, save to eat a morsel and
drink a draught, going through the night as men who knew their way well.
As they went, Walter wondered what would betide, and if peradventure they
also would be for offering them up to their Gods; whereas they were
aliens for certain, and belike also Saracens.  Moreover there was a cold
fear at his heart that he should be sundered from the Maid, whereas their
masters now were mighty men of war, holding in their hands that which all
men desire, to wit, the manifest beauty of a woman.  Yet he strove to
think the best of it that he might.  And so at last, when the night was
far spent, and dawn was at hand, they stayed at a great and mighty gate
in a huge wall.  There they blew loudly on the horn thrice, and
thereafter the gates were opened, and they all passed through into a
street, which seemed to Walter in the glimmer to be both great and goodly
amongst the abodes of men.  Then it was but a little ere they came into a
square, wide-spreading, one side whereof Walter took to be the front of a
most goodly house.  There the doors of the court opened to them or ever
the horn might blow, though, forsooth, blow it did loudly three times;
all they entered therein, and men came to Walter and signed to him to
alight.  So did he, and would have tarried to look about for the Maid,
but they suffered it not, but led him up a huge stair into a chamber,
very great, and but dimly lighted because of its greatness.  Then they
brought him to a bed dight as fair as might be, and made signs to him to
strip and lie therein.  Perforce he did so, and then they bore away his
raiment, and left him lying there.  So he lay there quietly, deeming it
no avail for him, a mother-naked man, to seek escape thence; but it was
long ere he might sleep, because of his trouble of mind.  At last, pure
weariness got the better of his hopes and fears, and he fell into slumber
just as the dawn was passing into day.




CHAPTER XXXII: OF THE NEW KING OF THE CITY AND LAND OF STARK-WALL


When he awoke again the sun was shining brightly into that chamber, and
he looked, and beheld that it was peerless of beauty and riches, amongst
all that he had ever seen: the ceiling done with gold and over-sea blue;
the walls hung with arras of the fairest, though he might not tell what
was the history done therein.  The chairs and stools were of carven work
well be-painted, and amidmost was a great ivory chair under a cloth of
estate, of bawdekin of gold and green, much be-pearled; and all the floor
was of fine work alexandrine.

He looked on all this, wondering what had befallen him, when lo! there
came folk into the chamber, to wit, two serving-men well-bedight, and
three old men clad in rich gowns of silk.  These came to him and (still
by signs, without speech) bade him arise and come with them; and when he
bade them look to it that he was naked, and laughed doubtfully, they
neither laughed in answer, nor offered him any raiment, but still would
have him arise, and he did so perforce.  They brought him with them out
of the chamber, and through certain passages pillared and goodly, till
they came to a bath as fair as any might be; and there the serving-men
washed him carefully and tenderly, the old men looking on the while.  When
it was done, still they offered not to clothe him, but led him out, and
through the passages again, back to the chamber.  Only this time he must
pass between a double hedge of men, some weaponed, some in peaceful
array, but all clad gloriously, and full chieftain-like of aspect, either
for valiancy or wisdom.

In the chamber itself was now a concourse of men, of great estate by
deeming of their array; but all these were standing orderly in a ring
about the ivory chair aforesaid.  Now said Walter to himself: Surely all
this looks toward the knife and the altar for me; but he kept a stout
countenance despite of all.

So they led him up to the ivory chair, and he beheld on either side
thereof a bench, and on each was laid a set of raiment from the shirt
upwards; but there was much diversity betwixt these arrays.  For one was
all of robes of peace, glorious and be-gemmed, unmeet for any save a
great king; while the other was war-weed, seemly, well-fashioned, but
little adorned; nay rather, worn and bestained with weather, and the
pelting of the spear-storm.

Now those old men signed to Walter to take which of those raiments he
would, and do it on.  He looked to the right and the left, and when he
had looked on the war-gear, the heart arose in him, and he called to mind
the array of the Goldings in the forefront of battle, and he made one
step toward the weapons, and laid his hand thereon.  Then ran a glad
murmur through that concourse, and the old men drew up to him smiling and
joyous, and helped him to do them on; and as he took up the helm, he
noted that over its broad brown iron sat a golden crown.

So when he was clad and weaponed, girt with a sword, and a steel axe in
his hand, the elders showed him to the ivory throne, and he laid the axe
on the arm of the chair, and drew forth the sword from the scabbard, and
sat him down, and laid the ancient blade across his knees; then he looked
about on those great men, and spake: "How long shall we speak no word to
each other, or is it so that God hath stricken you dumb?"

Then all they cried out with one voice: "All hail to the King, the King
of Battle!"

Spake Walter: "If I be king, will ye do my will as I bid you?"

Answered the elder: "Nought have we will to do, lord, save as thou
biddest."

Said Walter: "Thou then, wilt thou answer a question in all truth?"

"Yea, lord," said the elder, "if I may live afterward."

Then said Walter: "The woman that came with me into your Camp of the
Mountain, what hath befallen her?"

The elder answered: "Nought hath befallen her, either of good or evil,
save that she hath slept and eaten and bathed her.  What, then, is the
King's pleasure concerning her?"

"That ye bring her hither to me straightway," said Walter.

"Yea," said the elder; "and in what guise shall we bring her hither?
shall she be arrayed as a servant, or a great lady?"

Then Walter pondered a while, and spake at last: "Ask her what is her
will herein, and as she will have it, so let it be.  But set ye another
chair beside mine, and lead her thereto.  Thou wise old man, send one or
two to bring her in hither, but abide thou, for I have a question or two
to ask of thee yet.  And ye, lords, abide here the coming of my
she-fellow, if it weary you not."

So the elder spake to three of the most honourable of the lords, and they
went their ways to bring in the Maid.




CHAPTER XXXIII: CONCERNING THE FASHION OF KING-MAKING IN STARK-WALL


Meanwhile the King spake to the elder, and said: "Now tell me whereof I
am become king, and what is the fashion and cause of the king-making; for
wondrous it is to me, whereas I am but an alien amidst of mighty men."

"Lord," said the old man, "thou art become king of a mighty city, which
hath under it many other cities and wide lands, and havens by the sea-
side, and which lacketh no wealth which men desire.  Many wise men dwell
therein, and of fools not more than in other lands.  A valiant host shall
follow thee to battle when needs must thou wend afield; an host not to be
withstood, save by the ancient God-folk, if any of them were left upon
the earth, as belike none are.  And as to the name of our said city, it
hight the City of the Stark-wall, or more shortly, Stark-wall.  Now as to
the fashion of our king-making: If our king dieth and leaveth an heir
male, begotten of his body, then is he king after him; but if he die and
leave no heir, then send we out a great lord, with knights and sergeants,
to that pass of the mountain whereto ye came yesterday; and the first man
that cometh unto them, they take and lead to the city, as they did with
thee, lord.  For we believe and trow that of old time our forefathers
came down from the mountains by that same pass, poor and rude, but full
of valiancy, before they conquered these lands, and builded the Stark-
wall.  But now furthermore, when we have gotten the said wanderer, and
brought him home to our city, we behold him mother-naked, all the great
men of us, both sages and warriors; then if we find him ill-fashioned and
counterfeit of his body, we roll him in a great carpet till he dies; or
whiles, if he be but a simple man, and without guile, we deliver him for
thrall to some artificer amongst us, as a shoemaker, a wright, or what
not, and so forget him.  But in either case we make as if no such man had
come to us, and we send again the lord and his knights to watch the pass;
for we say that such an one the Fathers of old time have not sent us.  But
again, when we have seen to the new-comer that he is well-fashioned of
his body, all is not done; for we deem that never would the Fathers send
us a dolt or a craven to be our king.  Therefore we bid the naked one
take to him which he will of these raiments, either the ancient armour,
which now thou bearest, lord, or this golden raiment here; and if he take
the war-gear, as thou takedst it, King, it is well; but if he take the
raiment of peace, then hath he the choice either to be thrall of some
goodman of the city, or to be proven how wise he may be, and so fare the
narrow edge betwixt death and kingship; for if he fall short of his
wisdom, then shall he die the death.  Thus is thy question answered,
King, and praise be to the Fathers that they have sent us one whom none
may doubt, either for wisdom or valiancy."




CHAPTER XXXIV: NOW COMETH THE MAID TO THE KING


Then all they bowed before the King, and he spake again: "What is that
noise that I hear without, as if it were the rising of the sea on a sandy
shore, when the south-west wind is blowing."

Then the elder opened his mouth to answer; but before he might get out
the word, there was a stir without the chamber door, and the throng
parted, and lo! amidst of them came the Maid, and she yet clad in nought
save the white coat wherewith she had won through the wilderness, save
that on her head was a garland of red roses, and her middle was wreathed
with the same.  Fresh and fair she was as the dawn of June; her face
bright, red-lipped, and clear-eyed, and her cheeks flushed with hope and
love.  She went straight to Walter where he sat, and lightly put away
with her hand the elder who would lead her to the ivory throne beside the
King; but she knelt down before him, and laid her hand on his steel-clad
knee, and said: "O my lord, now I see that thou hast beguiled me, and
that thou wert all along a king-born man coming home to thy realm.  But
so dear thou hast been to me; and so fair and clear, and so kind withal
do thine eyes shine on me from under the grey war-helm, that I will
beseech thee not to cast me out utterly, but suffer me to be thy servant
and handmaid for a while.  Wilt thou not?"

But the King stooped down to her and raised her up, and stood on his
feet, and took her hands and kissed them, and set her down beside him,
and said to her: "Sweetheart, this is now thy place till the night
cometh, even by my side."

So she sat down there meek and valiant, her hands laid in her lap, and
her feet one over the other; while the King said: "Lords, this is my
beloved, and my spouse.  Now, therefore, if ye will have me for King, ye
must worship this one for Queen and Lady; or else suffer us both to go
our ways in peace."

Then all they that were in the chamber cried out aloud: "The Queen, the
Lady!  The beloved of our lord!"

And this cry came from their hearts, and not their lips only; for as they
looked on her, and the brightness of her beauty, they saw also the
meekness of her demeanour, and the high heart of her, and they all fell
to loving her.  But the young men of them, their cheeks flushed as they
beheld her, and their hearts went out to her, and they drew their swords
and brandished them aloft, and cried out for her as men made suddenly
drunk with love: "The Queen, the Lady, the lovely one!"




CHAPTER XXXV: OF THE KING OF STARK-WALL AND HIS QUEEN


But while this betid, that murmur without, which is aforesaid, grew
louder; and it smote on the King's ear, and he said again to the elder:
"Tell us now of that noise withoutward, what is it?"

Said the elder: "If thou, King, and the Queen, wilt but arise and stand
in the window, and go forth into the hanging gallery thereof, then shall
ye know at once what is this rumour, and therewithal shall ye see a sight
meet to rejoice the heart of a king new come into kingship."

So the King arose and took the Maid by the hand, and went to the window
and looked forth; and lo! the great square of the place all thronged with
folk as thick as they could stand, and the more part of the carles with a
weapon in hand, and many armed right gallantly.  Then he went out into
the gallery with his Queen, still holding her hand, and his lords and
wise men stood behind him.  Straightway then arose a cry, and a shout of
joy and welcome that rent the very heavens, and the great place was all
glittering and strange with the tossing up of spears and the brandishing
of swords, and the stretching forth of hands.

But the Maid spake softly to King Walter and said: "Here then is the
wilderness left behind a long way, and here is warding and protection
against the foes of our life and soul.  O blessed be thou and thy valiant
heart!"

But Walter spake nothing, but stood as one in a dream; and yet, if that
might be, his longing toward her increased manifold.

But down below, amidst of the throng, stood two neighbours somewhat anigh
to the window; and quoth one to the other: "See thou! the new man in the
ancient armour of the Battle of the Waters, bearing the sword that slew
the foeman king on the Day of the Doubtful Onset!  Surely this is a sign
of good-luck to us all."

"Yea," said the second, "he beareth his armour well, and the eyes are
bright in the head of him: but hast thou beheld well his she-fellow, and
what the like of her is?"

"I see her," said the other, "that she is a fair woman; yet somewhat
worse clad than simply.  She is in her smock, man, and were it not for
the balusters I deem ye should see her barefoot.  What is amiss with
her?"

"Dost thou not see her," said the second neighbour, "that she is not only
a fair woman, but yet more, one of those lovely ones that draw the heart
out of a man's body, one may scarce say for why?  Surely Stark-wall hath
cast a lucky net this time.  And as to her raiment, I see of her that she
is clad in white and wreathed with roses, but that the flesh of her is so
wholly pure and sweet that it maketh all her attire but a part of her
body, and halloweth it, so that it hath the semblance of gems.  Alas, my
friend! let us hope that this Queen will fare abroad unseldom amongst the
people."

Thus, then, they spake; but after a while the King and his mate went back
into the chamber, and he gave command that the women of the Queen should
come and fetch her away, to attire her in royal array.  And thither came
the fairest of the honourable damsels, and were fain of being her waiting-
women.  Therewithal the King was unarmed, and dight most gloriously, but
still he bore the Sword of the King's Slaying: and sithence were the King
and the Queen brought into the great hall of the palace, and they met on
the dais, and kissed before the lords and other folk that thronged the
hall.  There they ate a morsel and drank a cup together while all beheld
them; and then they were brought forth, and a white horse of the
goodliest, well bedight, brought for each of them, and thereon they
mounted and went their ways together, by the lane which the huge throng
made for them, to the great church, for the hallowing and the crowning;
and they were led by one squire alone, and he unarmed; for such was the
custom of Stark-wall when a new king should be hallowed: so came they to
the great church (for that folk was not miscreant, so to say), and they
entered it, they two alone, and went into the choir: and when they had
stood there a little while wondering at their lot, they heard how the
bells fell a-ringing tunefully over their heads; and then drew near the
sound of many trumpets blowing together, and thereafter the voices of
many folk singing; and then were the great doors thrown open, and the
bishop and his priests came into the church with singing and minstrelsy,
and thereafter came the whole throng of the folk, and presently the nave
of the church was filled by it, as when the water follows the cutting of
the dam, and fills up the dyke.  Thereafter came the bishop and his mates
into the choir, and came up to the King, and gave him and the Queen the
kiss of peace.  This was mass sung gloriously; and thereafter was the
King anointed and crowned, and great joy was made throughout the church.
Afterwards they went back afoot to the palace, they two alone together,
with none but the esquire going before to show them the way.  And as they
went, they passed close beside those two neighbours, whose talk has been
told of afore, and the first one, he who had praised the King's
war-array, spake and said: "Truly, neighbour, thou art in the right of
it; and now the Queen has been dight duly, and hath a crown on her head,
and is clad in white samite done all over with pearls, I see her to be of
exceeding goodliness; as goodly, maybe, as the Lord King."

Quoth the other: "Unto me she seemeth as she did e'en now; she is clad in
white, as then she was, and it is by reason of the pure and sweet flesh
of her that the pearls shine out and glow, and by the holiness of her
body is her rich attire hallowed; but, forsooth, it seemed to me as she
went past as though paradise had come anigh to our city, and that all the
air breathed of it.  So I say, praise be to God and His Hallows who hath
suffered her to dwell amongst us!"

Said the first man: "Forsooth, it is well; but knowest thou at all whence
she cometh, and of what lineage she may be?"

"Nay," said the other, "I wot not whence she is; but this I wot full
surely, that when she goeth away, they whom she leadeth with her shall be
well bestead.  Again, of her lineage nought know I; but this I know, that
they that come of her, to the twentieth generation, shall bless and
praise the memory of her, and hallow her name little less than they
hallow the name of the Mother of God."

So spake those two; but the King and Queen came back to the palace, and
sat among the lords and at the banquet which was held thereafter, and
long was the time of their glory, till the night was far spent and all
men must seek to their beds.




CHAPTER XXXVI: OF WALTER AND THE MAID IN THE DAYS OF THE KINGSHIP


Long it was, indeed, till the women, by the King's command, had brought
the Maid to the King's chamber; and he met her, and took her by the
shoulders and kissed her, and said: "Art thou not weary, sweetheart?  Doth
not the city, and the thronging folk, and the watching eyes of the great
ones . . . doth it not all lie heavy on thee, as it doth upon me?"

She said: "And where is the city now? is not this the wilderness again,
and thou and I alone together therein?"

He gazed at her eagerly, and she reddened, so that her eyes shone light
amidst the darkness of the flush of her cheeks.

He spake trembling and softly, and said: "Is it not in one matter better
than the wilderness? is not the fear gone, yea, every whit thereof?"

The dark flush had left her face, and she looked on him exceeding
sweetly, and spoke steadily and clearly: "Even so it is, beloved."
Therewith she set her hand to the girdle that girt her loins, and did it
off, and held it out toward him, and said: "Here is the token; this is a
maid's girdle, and the woman is ungirt."

So he took the girdle and her hand withal, and cast his arms about her:
and amidst the sweetness of their love and their safety, and assured hope
of many days of joy, they spake together of the hours when they fared the
razor-edge betwixt guile and misery and death, and the sweeter yet it
grew to them because of it; and many things she told him ere the dawn, of
the evil days bygone, and the dealings of the Mistress with her, till the
grey day stole into the chamber to make manifest her loveliness; which,
forsooth, was better even than the deeming of that man amidst the throng
whose heart had been so drawn towards her.  So they rejoiced together in
the new day.

But when the full day was, and Walter arose, he called his thanes and
wise men to the council; and first he bade open the prison-doors, and
feed the needy and clothe them, and make good cheer to all men, high and
low, rich and unrich; and thereafter he took counsel with them on many
matters, and they marvelled at his wisdom and the keenness of his wit;
and so it was, that some were but half pleased thereat, whereas they saw
that their will was like to give way before his in all matters.  But the
wiser of them rejoiced in him, and looked for good days while his life
lasted.

Now of the deeds that he did, and his joys and his griefs, the tale shall
tell no more; nor of how he saw Langton again, and his dealings there.

In Stark-wall he dwelt, and reigned a King, well beloved of his folk,
sorely feared of their foemen.  Strife he had to deal with, at home and
abroad; but therein he was not quelled, till he fell asleep fair and
softly, when this world had no more of deeds for him to do.  Nor may it
be said that the needy lamented him; for no needy had he left in his own
land.  And few foes he left behind to hate him.

As to the Maid, she so waxed in loveliness and kindness, that it was a
year's joy for any to have cast eyes upon her in street or on field.  All
wizardry left her since the day of her wedding; yet of wit and wisdom she
had enough left, and to spare; for she needed no going about, and no
guile, any more than hard commands, to have her will done.  So loved she
was by all folk, forsooth, that it was a mere joy for any to go about her
errands.  To be short, she was the land's increase, and the city's
safeguard, and the bliss of the folk.

Somewhat, as the days passed, it misgave her that she had beguiled the
Bear-folk to deem her their God; and she considered and thought how she
might atone it.

So the second year after they had come to Stark-wall, she went with
certain folk to the head of the pass that led down to the Bears; and
there she stayed the men-at-arms, and went on further with a two score of
husbandmen whom she had redeemed from thralldom in Stark-wall; and when
they were hard on the dales of the Bears, she left them there in a
certain little dale, with their wains and horses, and seed-corn, and iron
tools, and went down all bird-alone to the dwelling of those huge men,
unguarded now by sorcery, and trusting in nought but her loveliness and
kindness.  Clad she was now, as when she fled from the Wood beyond the
World, in a short white coat alone, with bare feet and naked arms; but
the said coat was now embroidered with the imagery of blossoms in silk
and gold, and gems, whereas now her wizardry had departed from her.

So she came to the Bears, and they knew her at once, and worshipped and
blessed her, and feared her.  But she told them that she had a gift for
them, and was come to give it; and therewith she told them of the art of
tillage, and bade them learn it; and when they asked her how they should
do so, she told them of the men who were abiding them in the mountain
dale, and bade the Bears take them for their brothers and sons of the
ancient Fathers, and then they should be taught of them.  This they
behight her to do, and so she led them to where her freedmen lay, whom
the Bears received with all joy and loving-kindness, and took them into
their folk.

So they went back to their dales together; but the Maid went her ways
back to her men-at-arms and the city of Stark-wall.

Thereafter she sent more gifts and messages to the Bears, but never again
went herself to see them; for as good a face as she put on it that last
time, yet her heart waxed cold with fear, and it almost seemed to her
that her Mistress was alive again, and that she was escaping from her and
plotting against her once more.

As for the Bears, they throve and multiplied; till at last strife arose
great and grim betwixt them and other peoples; for they had become mighty
in battle: yea, once and again they met the host of Stark-wall in fight,
and overthrew and were overthrown.  But that was a long while after the
Maid had passed away.

Now of Walter and the Maid is no more to be told, saving that they begat
between them goodly sons and fair daughters; whereof came a great lineage
in Stark-wall; which lineage was so strong, and endured so long a while,
that by then it had died out, folk had clean forgotten their ancient
Custom of king-making, so that after Walter of Langton there was never
another king that came down to them poor and lonely from out of the
Mountains of the Bears.

Introduction

I found myself in Twilight Land. How I ever got there I cannot tell, but
there I was in Twilight Land.

What is Twilight Land? It is a wonderful, wonderful place where no sun
shines to scorch your back as you jog along the way, where no rain falls
to make the road muddy and hard to travel, where no wind blows the dust
into your eyes or the chill into your marrow. Where all is sweet and
quiet and ready to go to bed.

Where is Twilight Land? Ah! that I cannot tell you. You will either have
to ask your mother or find it for yourself.

There I was in Twilight Land. The birds were singing their good-night
song, and the little frogs were piping “peet, peet.” The sky overhead
was full of still brightness, and the moon in the east hung in the
purple gray like a great bubble as yellow as gold. All the air was full
of the smell of growing things. The high-road was gray, and the trees
were dark.

I drifted along the road as a soap-bubble floats before the wind, or as
a body floats in a dream. I floated along and I floated along past the
trees, past the bushes, past the mill-pond, past the mill where the old
miller stood at the door looking at me.

I floated on, and there was the Inn, and it was the Sign of Mother
Goose.

The sign hung on a pole, and on it was painted a picture of Mother Goose
with her gray gander.

It was to the Inn I wished to come.

I floated on, and I would have floated past the Inn, and perhaps have
gotten into the Land of Never-Come-Back-Again, only I caught at
the branch of an apple-tree, and so I stopped myself, though the
apple-blossoms came falling down like pink and white snowflakes.

The earth and the air and the sky were all still, just as it is at
twilight, and I heard them laughing and talking in the tap-room of
the Inn of the Sign of Mother Goose--the clinking of glasses, and the
rattling and clatter of knives and forks and plates and dishes. That was
where I wished to go.

So in I went. Mother Goose herself opened the door, and there I was.

The room was all full of twilight; but there they sat, every one of
them. I did not count them, but there were ever so many: Aladdin, and
Ali Baba, and Fortunatis, and Jack-the-Giant-Killer, and Doctor Faustus,
and Bidpai, and Cinderella, and Patient Grizzle, and the Soldier who
cheated the Devil, and St. George, and Hans in Luck, who traded and
traded his lump of gold until he had only an empty churn to show for it;
and there was Sindbad the Sailor, and the Tailor who killed seven flies
at a blow, and the Fisherman who fished up the Genie, and the Lad who
fiddled for the Jew in the bramble-bush, and the Blacksmith who made
Death sit in his apple-tree, and Boots, who always marries the Princess,
whether he wants to or not--a rag-tag lot as ever you saw in your life,
gathered from every place, and brought together in Twilight Land.

Each one of them was telling a story, and now it was the turn of the
Soldier who cheated the Devil.

“I will tell you,” said the Soldier who cheated the Devil, “a story of a
friend of mine.”

“Take a fresh pipe of tobacco,” said St. George.

“Thank you, I will,” said the Soldier who cheated the Devil.

He filled his long pipe full of tobacco, and then he tilted it upside
down and sucked in the light of the candle.

Puff! puff! puff! and a cloud of smoke went up about his head, so that
you could just see his red nose shining through it, and his bright eyes
twinkling in the midst of the smoke-wreath, like two stars through a
thin cloud on a summer night.

“I’ll tell you,” said the Soldier who cheated the Devil, “the story of
a friend of mine. Tis every word of it just as true as that I myself
cheated the Devil.”

He took a drink from his mug of beer, and then he began.

“Tis called,” said he--




The Stool of Fortune

Once upon a time there came a soldier marching along the road, kicking
up a little cloud of dust at each step--as strapping and merry and
bright-eyed a fellow as you would wish to see in a summer day. Tramp!
tramp! tramp! he marched, whistling as he jogged along, though he
carried a heavy musket over his shoulder and though the sun shone hot
and strong and there was never a tree in sight to give him a bit of
shelter.

At last he came in sight of the King’s Town and to a great field of
stocks and stones, and there sat a little old man as withered and brown
as a dead leaf, and clad all in scarlet from head to foot.

“Ho! soldier,” said he, “are you a good shot?”

“Aye,” said the soldier, “that is my trade.”

“Would you like to earn a dollar by shooting off your musket for me?”

“Aye,” said the soldier, “that is my trade also.”

“Very well, then,” said the little man in red, “here is a silver button
to drop into your gun instead of a bullet. Wait you here, and about
sunset there will come a great black bird flying. In one claw it carries
a feather cap and in the other a round stone. Shoot me the silver button
at that bird, and if your aim is good it will drop the feather cap and
the pebble. Bring them to me to the great town-gate and I will pay you a
dollar for your trouble.”

“Very well,” said the soldier, “shooting my gun is a job that fits me
like an old coat.” So, down he sat and the old man went his way.

Well, there he sat and sat and sat and sat until the sun touched the rim
of the ground, and then, just as the old man said, there came flying a
great black bird as silent as night. The soldier did not tarry to look
or to think. As the bird flew by up came the gun to his shoulder, squint
went his eye along the barrel--Puff! bang--!

I vow and declare that if the shot he fired had cracked the sky he
could not have been more frightened. The great black bird gave a yell so
terrible that it curdled the very blood in his veins and made his hair
stand upon end. Away it flew like a flash--a bird no longer, but a
great, black demon, smoking and smelling most horribly of brimstone,
and when the soldier gathered his wits, there lay the feather cap and a
little, round, black stone upon the ground.

“Well,” said the soldier, “it is little wonder that the old man had
no liking to shoot at such game as that.” And thereupon he popped
the feather cap into one pocket and the round stone into another, and
shouldering his musket marched away until he reached the town-gate, and
there was the old man waiting for him.

“Did you shoot the bird?” said he.

“I did,” said the soldier.

“And did you get the cap and the round stone?”

“I did.”

“Then here is your dollar.”

“Wait a bit,” said the soldier, “I shot greater game that time than
I bargained for, and so it’s ten dollars and not one you shall pay me
before you lay finger upon the feather cap and the little stone.”

“Very well,” said the old man, “here are ten dollars.”

“Ho! ho!” thought the soldier, “is that the way the wind blows?”--“Did I
say ten dollars?” said he; “twas a hundred dollars I meant.”

At that the old man frowned until his eyes shone green. “Very well,”
 said he, “if it is a hundred dollars you want, you will have to come
home with me, for I have not so much with me.” Thereupon he entered the
town with the soldier at his heels.

Up one street he went and down another, until at last he came to a
great, black, ancient ramshackle house; and that was where he lived. In
he walked without so much as a rap at the door, and so led the way to
a great room with furnaces and books and bottles and jars and dust and
cobwebs, and three grinning skulls upon the mantelpiece, each with a
candle stuck atop of it, and there he left the soldier while he went to
get the hundred dollars.

The soldier sat him down upon a three-legged stool in the corner and
began staring about him; and he liked the looks of the place as little
as any he had seen in all of his life, for it smelled musty and dusty,
it did: the three skulls grinned at him, and he began to think that the
little old man was no better than he should be. “I wish,” says he, at
last, “that instead of being here I might be well out of my scrape and
in a safe place.”

Now the little old man in scarlet was a great magician, and there was
little or nothing in that house that had not some magic about it, and of
all things the three-legged stool had been conjured the most.

“I wish that instead of being here I might be well out of my scrape,
and in a safe place.” That was what the soldier said; and hardly had the
words left his lips when--whisk! whir!--away flew the stool through the
window, so suddenly that the soldier had only just time enough to gripe
it tight by the legs to save himself from falling. Whir! whiz!--away it
flew like a bullet. Up and up it went--so high in the air that the earth
below looked like a black blanket spread out in the night; and then down
it came again, with the soldier still griping tight to the legs, until
at last it settled as light as a feather upon a balcony of the king’s
palace; and when the soldier caught his wind again he found himself
without a hat, and with hardly any wits in his head.

There he sat upon the stool for a long time without daring to move, for
he did not know what might happen to him next. There he sat and sat, and
by-and-by his ears got cold in the night air, and then he noticed for
the first time that he had lost his head gear, and bethought himself of
the feather cap in his pocket. So out he drew it and clapped it upon his
head, and then--lo and behold!--he found he had become as invisible as
thin air--not a shred or a hair of him could be seen. “Well!” said he,
“here is another wonder, but I am safe now at any rate.” And up he got
to find some place not so cool as where he sat.

He stepped in at an open window, and there he found himself in a
beautiful room, hung with cloth of silver and blue, and with chairs and
tables of white and gold; dozens and scores of waxlights shone like so
many stars, and lit every crack and cranny as bright as day, and there
at one end of the room upon a couch, with her eyelids closed and fast
asleep, lay the prettiest princess that ever the sun shone upon. The
soldier stood and looked and looked at her, and looked and looked at
her, until his heart melted within him like soft butter, and then he
kissed her.

“Who is that?” said the princess, starting up, wide-awake, but not a
soul could she see, because the soldier had the feather cap upon his
head.

“It is I,” said he, “and I am King of the Wind, and ten times greater
than the greatest of kings here below. One day I saw you walking in your
garden and fell in love with you, and now I have come to ask you if you
will marry me and be my wife?”

“But how can I marry you?” said the princess, “without seeing you?”

“You shall see me,” said the soldier, “all in good time. Three days
from now I will come again, and will show myself to you, but just now it
cannot be. But if I come, will you marry me?”

“Yes I will,” said the princess, “for I like the way you talk--that I
do!”

Thereupon the soldier kissed her and said good-bye, and then stepped
out of the window as he had stepped in. He sat him down upon his
three-legged stool. “I wish,” said he, “to be carried to such and such a
tavern.” For he had been in that town before, and knew the places where
good living was to be had.

Whir! whiz! away flew the stool as high and higher than it had flown
before, and then down it came again, and down and down until it lit as
light as a feather in the street before the tavern door. The soldier
tucked his feather cap in his pocket, and the three-legged stool under
his arm, and in he went and ordered a pot of beer and some white bread
and cheese.

Meantime, at the king’s palace was such a gossiping and such a hubbub as
had not been heard there for many a day; for the pretty princess was not
slow in telling how the invisible King of the Wind had come and asked
her to marry him; and some said it was true and some said it was not
true, and everybody wondered and talked, and told their own notions of
the matter. But all agreed that three days would show whether what had
been told was true or no.

As for the soldier, he knew no more how to do what he had promised to do
than my grandmother’s cat; for where was he to get clothes fine enough
for the King of the Wind to wear? So there he sat on his three-legged
stool thinking and thinking, and if he had known all that I know he
would not have given two turns of his wit upon it. “I wish,” says he, at
last--“I wish that this stool could help me now as well as it can carry
me through the sky. I wish,” says he, “that I had a suit of clothes such
as the King of the Wind might really wear.”

The wonders of the three-legged stool were wonders indeed!

Hardly had the words left the soldier’s lips when down came something
tumbling about his ears from up in the air; and what should it be but
just such a suit of clothes as he had in his mind--all crusted over with
gold and silver and jewels.

“Well,” says the soldier, as soon as he had got over his wonder again,
“I would rather sit upon this stool than any I ever saw.” And so would
I, if I had been in his place, and had a few minutes to think of all
that I wanted.

So he found out the trick of the stool, and after that wishing and
having were easy enough, and by the time the three days were ended the
real King of the Wind himself could not have cut a finer figure. Then
down sat the soldier upon his stool, and wished himself at the king’s
palace. Away he flew through the air, and by-and-by there he was, just
where he had been before. He put his feather cap upon his head, and
stepped in through the window, and there he found the princess with her
father, the king, and her mother, the queen, and all the great lords and
nobles waiting for his coming; but never a stitch nor a hair did they
see of him until he stood in the very midst of them all. Then he whipped
the feather cap off of his head, and there he was, shining with silver
and gold and glistening with jewels--such a sight as man’s eyes never
saw before.

“Take her,” said the king, “she is yours.” And the soldier looked so
handsome in his fine clothes that the princess was as glad to hear those
words as any she had ever listened to in all of her life.

“You shall,” said the king, “be married to-morrow.”

“Very well,” said the soldier. “Only give me a plot of ground to build
a palace upon that shall be fit for the wife of the King of the Wind to
live in.”

“You shall have it,” said the king, “and it shall be the great parade
ground back of the palace, which is so wide and long that all my army
can march round and round in it without getting into its own way; and
that ought to be big enough.”

“Yes,” said the soldier, “it is.” Thereupon he put on his feather cap
and disappeared from the sight of all as quickly as one might snuff out
a candle.

He mounted his three-legged stool and away he flew through the air until
he had come again to the tavern where he was lodging. There he sat him
down and began to churn his thoughts, and the butter he made was worth
the having, I can tell you. He wished for a grand palace of white
marble, and then he wished for all sorts of things to fill it--the
finest that could be had. Then he wished for servants in clothes of gold
and silver, and then he wished for fine horses and gilded coaches.
Then he wished for gardens and orchards and lawns and flower-plats and
fountains, and all kinds and sorts of things, until the sweat ran down
his face from hard thinking and wishing. And as he thought and wished,
all the things he thought and wished for grew up like soap-bubbles from
nothing at all.

Then, when day began to break, he wished himself with his fine clothes
to be in the palace that his own wits had made, and away he flew through
the air until he had come there safe and sound.

But when the sun rose and shone down upon the beautiful palace and all
the gardens and orchards around it, the king and queen and all the court
stood dumb with wonder at the sight. Then, as they stood staring, the
gates opened and out came the soldier riding in his gilded coach with
his servants in silver and gold marching beside him, and such a sight
the daylight never looked upon before that day.

Well, the princess and the soldier were married, and if no couple had
ever been happy in the world before, they were then. Nothing was heard
but feasting and merrymaking, and at night all the sky was lit with
fireworks. Such a wedding had never been before, and all the world was
glad that it had happened.

That is, all the world but one; that one was the old man dressed in
scarlet that the soldier had met when he first came to town. While all
the rest were in the hubbub of rejoicing, he put on his thinking-cap,
and by-and-by began to see pretty well how things lay, and that, as they
say in our town, there was a fly in the milk-jug. “Ho, ho!” thought he,
“so the soldier has found out all about the three-legged stool, has he?
Well, I will just put a spoke into his wheel for him.” And so he began
to watch for his chance to do the soldier an ill turn.

Now, a week or two after the wedding, and after all the gay doings had
ended, a grand hunt was declared, and the king and his new son-in-law
and all the court went to it. That was just such a chance as the old
magician had been waiting for; so the night before the hunting-party
returned he climbed the walls of the garden, and so came to the
wonderful palace that the soldier had built out of nothing at all, and
there stood three men keeping guard so that no one might enter.

But little that troubled the magician. He began to mutter spells and
strange words, and all of a sudden he was gone, and in his place was
a great black ant, for he had changed himself into an ant. In he ran
through a crack of the door (and mischief has got into many a man’s
house through a smaller hole for the matter of that). In and out ran the
ant through one room and another, and up and down and here and there,
until at last in a far-away part of the magic palace he found the
three-legged stool, and if I had been in the soldier’s place I would
have chopped it up into kindling-wood after I had gotten all that I
wanted. But there it was, and in an instant the magician resumed his
own shape. Down he sat him upon the stool. “I wish,” said he, “that this
palace and the princess and all who are within it, together with its
orchards and its lawns and its gardens and everything, may be removed to
such and such a country, upon the other side of the earth.”

And as the stool had obeyed the soldier, so everything was done now just
as the magician said.

The next morning back came the hunting-party, and as they rode over the
hill--lo and behold!--there lay stretched out the great parade ground
in which the king’s armies used to march around and around, and the land
was as bare as the palm of my hand. Not a stick or a stone of the palace
was left; not a leaf or a blade of the orchards or gardens was to be
seen.

The soldier sat as dumb as a fish, and the king stared with eyes and
mouth wide open. “Where is the palace, and where is my daughter?” said
he, at last, finding words and wit.

“I do not know,” said the soldier.

The king’s face grew as black as thunder. “You do not know?” he said,
“then you must find out. Seize the traitor!” he cried.

But that was easier said than done, for, quick as a wink, as they came
to lay hold of him, the soldier whisked the feather cap from his pocket
and clapped it upon his head, and then they might as well have hoped to
find the south wind in winter as to find him.

But though he got safe away from that trouble he was deep enough in the
dumps, you may be sure of that. Away he went, out into the wide world,
leaving that town behind him. Away he went, until by-and-by he came to
a great forest, and for three days he travelled on and on--he knew not
whither. On the third night, as he sat beside a fire which he had built
to keep him warm, he suddenly bethought himself of the little round
stone which had dropped from the bird’s claw, and which he still had in
his pocket. “Why should it not also help me,” said he, “for there must
be some wonder about it.” So he brought it out, and sat looking at it
and looking at it, but he could make nothing of it for the life of him.
Nevertheless, it might have some wishing power about it, like the
magic stool. “I wish,” said the soldier, “that I might get out of this
scrape.” That is what we have all wished many and many a time in a like
case; but just now it did the soldier no more good to wish than it does
good for the rest of us. “Bah!” said he, “it is nothing but a black
stone after all.” And then he threw it into the fire.

Puff! Bang! Away flew the embers upon every side, and back tumbled the
soldier, and there in the middle of the flame stood just such a grim,
black being as he had one time shot at with the silver button.

As for the poor soldier, he just lay flat on his back and stared with
eyes like saucers, for he thought that his end had come for sure.

“What are my lord’s commands?” said the being, in a voice that shook the
marrow of the soldier’s bones.

“Who are you?” said the soldier.

“I am the spirit of the stone,” said the being. “You have heated it in
the flame, and I am here. Whatever you command I must obey.”

“Say you so?” cried the soldier, scrambling to his feet. “Very well,
then, just carry me to where I may find my wife and my palace again.”

Without a word the spirit of the stone snatched the soldier up, and
flew away with him swifter than the wind. Over forest, over field, over
mountain and over valley he flew, until at last, just at the crack of
day, he set him down in front of his own palace gate in the far country
where the magician had transported it.

After that the soldier knew his way quickly enough. He clapped his
feather cap upon his head and into the palace he went, and from one room
to another, until at last he came to where the princess sat weeping and
wailing, with her pretty eyes red from long crying.

Then the soldier took off his cap again, and you may guess what sounds
of rejoicing followed. They sat down beside one another, and after the
soldier had eaten, the princess told him all that had happened to her;
how the magician had found the stool, and how he had transported the
palace to this far-away land; how he came every day and begged her to
marry him--which she would rather die than do.

To all this the soldier listened, and when she had ended her story he
bade her to dry her tears, for, after all, the jug was only cracked,
and not past mending. Then he told her that when the sorcerer came again
that day she should say so and so and so and so, and that he would be by
to help her with his feather cap upon his head.

After that they sat talking together as happy as two turtle-doves,
until the magician’s foot was heard on the stairs. And then the soldier
clapped his feather cap upon his head just as the door opened.

“Snuff, snuff!” said the magician, sniffing the air, “here is a smell of
Christian blood.”

“Yes,” said the princess, “that is so; there came a peddler to-day, but
after all he did not stay long.”

“He’d better not come again,” said the magician, “or it will be the
worse for him. But tell me, will you marry me?”

“No,” said the princess, “I shall not marry you until you can prove
yourself to be a greater man than my husband.”

“Pooh!” said the magician, “that will be easy enough to prove; tell me
how you would have me do so and I will do it.”

“Very well,” said the princess, “then let me see you change yourself
into a lion. If you can do that I may perhaps believe you to be as great
as my husband.”

“It shall,” said the magician, “be as you say. He began to mutter spells
and strange words, and then all of a sudden he was gone, and in his
place there stood a lion with bristling mane and flaming eyes--a sight
fit of itself to kill a body with terror.

“That will do!” cried the princess, quaking and trembling at the sight,
and thereupon the magician took his own shape again.

“Now,” said he, “do you believe that I am as great as the poor soldier?”

“Not yet,” said the princess; “I have seen how big you can make
yourself, now I wish to see how little you can become. Let me see you
change yourself into a mouse.”

“So be it,” said the magician, and began again to mutter his spells.
Then all of a sudden he was gone just as he was gone before, and in his
place was a little mouse sitting up and looking at the princess with a
pair of eyes like glass beads.

But he did not sit there long. This was what the soldier had planned
for, and all the while he had been standing by with his feather hat upon
his head. Up he raised his foot, and down he set it upon the mouse.

Crunch!--that was an end of the magician.

After that all was clear sailing; the soldier hunted up the three-legged
stool and down he sat upon it, and by dint of no more than just a little
wishing, back flew palace and garden and all through the air again to
the place whence it came.

I do not know whether the old king ever believed again that his
son-in-law was the King of the Wind; anyhow, all was peace and
friendliness thereafter, for when a body can sit upon a three-legged
stool and wish to such good purpose as the soldier wished, a body is
just as good as a king, and a good deal better, to my mind.

The Soldier who cheated the Devil looked into his pipe; it was nearly
out. He puffed and puffed and the coal glowed brighter, and fresh clouds
of smoke rolled up into the air. Little Brown Betty came and refilled,
from a crock of brown foaming ale, the mug which he had emptied. The
Soldier who had cheated the Devil looked up at her and winked one eye.

“Now,” said St. George, “it is the turn of yonder old man,” and he
pointed, as he spoke, with the stem of his pipe towards old Bidpai, who
sat with closed eyes meditating inside of himself.

The old man opened his eyes, the whites of which were as yellow as
saffron, and wrinkled his face into innumerable cracks and lines. Then
he closed his eyes again; then he opened them again; then he cleared
his throat and began: “There was once upon a time a man whom other men
called Aben Hassen the Wise--”

“One moment,” said Ali Baba; “will you not tell us what the story is
about?”

Old Bidpai looked at him and stroked his long white beard. “It is,” said
he, “about--”




The Talisman of Solomon

There was once upon a time a man whom other men called Aben Hassen
the Wise. He had read a thousand books of magic, and knew all that the
ancients or moderns had to tell of the hidden arts.

The King of the Demons of the Earth, a great and hideous monster,
named Zadok, was his servant, and came and went as Aben Hassen the Wise
ordered, and did as he bade. After Aben Hassen learned all that it was
possible for man to know, he said to himself, “Now I will take my ease
and enjoy my life.” So he called the Demon Zadok to him, and said to the
monster, “I have read in my books that there is a treasure that was one
time hidden by the ancient kings of Egypt--a treasure such as the eyes
of man never saw before or since their day. Is that true?”

“It is true,” said the Demon.

“Then I command thee to take me to that treasure and to show it to me,”
 said Aben Hassen the Wise.

“It shall be done,” said the Demon; and thereupon he caught up the Wise
Man and transported him across mountain and valley, across land and
sea, until he brought him to a country known as the “Land of the Black
Isles,” where the treasure of the ancient kings was hidden. The Demon
showed the Magician the treasure, and it was a sight such as man had
never looked upon before or since the days that the dark, ancient ones
hid it. With his treasure Aben Hassen built himself palaces and gardens
and paradises such as the world never saw before. He lived like an
emperor, and the fame of his doings rang through all the four corners of
the earth.

Now the queen of the Black Isles was the most beautiful woman in the
world, but she was as cruel and wicked and cunning as she was beautiful.
No man that looked upon her could help loving her; for not only was
she as beautiful as a dream, but her beauty was of that sort that it
bewitched a man in spite of himself.

One day the queen sent for Aben Hassen the Wise. “Tell me,” said she,
“is it true that men say of you that you have discovered a hidden
treasure such as the world never saw before?” And she looked at Aben
Hassen so that his wisdom all crumbled away like sand, and he became
just as foolish as other men.

“Yes,” said he, “it is true.”

Aben Hassen the Wise spent all that day with the queen, and when he left
the palace he was like a man drunk and dizzy with love. Moreover, he had
promised to show the queen the hidden treasure the next day.

As Aben Hassen, like a man in a dream, walked towards his own house, he
met an old man standing at the corner of the street. The old man had a
talisman that hung dangling from a chain, and which he offered for sale.
When Aben Hassen saw the talisman he knew very well what it was--that
it was the famous talisman of King Solomon the Wise. If he who possessed
the talisman asked it to speak, it would tell that man both what to do
and what not to do.

The Wise Man bought the talisman for three pieces of silver (and wisdom
has been sold for less than that many a time), and as soon as he had the
talisman in his hands he hurried home with it and locked himself in a
room.

“Tell me,” said the Wise Man to the Talisman, “shall I marry the
beautiful queen of the Black Isles?”

“Fly, while there is yet time to escape!” said the Talisman; “but go not
near the queen again, for she seeks to destroy thy life.”

“But tell me, O Talisman!” said the Wise Man, “what then shall I do with
all that vast treasure of the kings of Egypt?”

“Fly from it while there is yet chance to escape!” said the Talisman;
“but go not into the treasure-house again, for in the farther door,
where thou hast not yet looked, is that which will destroy him who
possesses the treasure.”

“But Zadok,” said Aben Hassen; “what of Zadok?”

“Fly from the monster while there is yet time to escape,” said the
Talisman, “and have no more to do with thy Demon slave, for already he
is weaving a net of death and destruction about thy feet.”

The Wise Man sat all that night pondering and thinking upon what the
Talisman had said. When morning came he washed and dressed himself, and
called the Demon Zadok to him. “Zadok,” said he, “carry me to the palace
of the queen.” In the twinkling of an eye the Demon transported him to
the steps of the palace.

“Zadok,” said the Wise Man, “give me the staff of life and death;” and
the Demon brought from under his clothes a wand, one-half of which was
of silver and one-half of which was of gold. The Wise Man touched the
steps of the palace with the silver end of the staff. Instantly all
the sound and hum of life was hushed. The thread of life was cut by the
knife of silence, and in a moment all was as still as death.

“Zadok,” said the Wise Man, “transport me to the treasure-house of the
king of Egypt.” And instantly the Demon had transported him thither. The
Wise Man drew a circle upon the earth. “No one,” said he, “shall have
power to enter here but the master of Zadok, the King of the Demons of
the Earth.”

“And now, Zadok,” said he, “I command thee to transport me to India,
and as far from here as thou canst.” Instantly the Demon did as he
was commanded; and of all the treasure that he had, the Wise Man took
nothing with him but a jar of golden money and a jar of silver money.
As soon as the Wise Man stood upon the ground of India, he drew from
beneath his robe a little jar of glass.

“Zadok,” said he, “I command thee to enter this jar.”

Then the Demon knew that now his turn had come. He besought and implored
the Wise Man to have mercy upon him; but it was all in vain. Then the
Demon roared and bellowed till the earth shook and the sky grew dark
overhead. But all was of no avail; into the jar he must go, and into the
jar he went. Then the Wise Man stoppered the jar and sealed it. He wrote
an inscription of warning upon it, and then he buried it in the ground.

“Now,” said Aben Hassen the Wise to the Talisman of Solomon, “have I
done everything that I should?”

“No,” said the Talisman, “thou shouldst not have brought the jar of
golden money and the jar of silver money with thee; for that which is
evil in the greatest is evil in the least. Thou fool! The treasure is
cursed! Cast it all from thee while there is yet time.”

“Yes, I will do that, too,” said the Wise Man. So he buried in the earth
the jar of gold and the jar of silver that he had brought with him, and
then he stamped the mould down upon it. After that the Wise Man began
his life all over again. He bought, and he sold, and he traded, and
by-and-by he became rich. Then he built himself a great house, and in
the foundation he laid the jar in which the Demon was bottled.

Then he married a young and handsome wife. By-and-by the wife bore him a
son, and then she died.

This son was the pride of his father’s heart; but he was as vain and
foolish as his father was wise, so that all men called him Aben Hassen
the Fool, as they called the father Aben Hassen the Wise.

Then one day death came and called the old man, and he left his son all
that belonged to him--even the Talisman of Solomon.

Young Aben Hassen the Fool had never seen so much money as now belonged
to him. It seemed to him that there was nothing in the world he could
not enjoy. He found friends by the dozens and scores, and everybody
seemed to be very fond of him.

He asked no questions of the Talisman of Solomon, for to his mind there
was no need of being both wise and rich. So he began enjoying himself
with his new friends. Day and night there was feasting and drinking and
singing and dancing and merrymaking and carousing; and the money that
the old man had made by trading and wise living poured out like water
through a sieve.

Then, one day came an end to all this junketing, and nothing remained to
the young spend-thrift of all the wealth that his father had left him.
Then the officers of the law came down upon him and seized all that was
left of the fine things, and his fair-weather friends flew away from his
troubles like flies from vinegar. Then the young man began to think of
the Talisman of Wisdom. For it was with him as it is with so many of
us: When folly has emptied the platter, wisdom is called in to pick the
bones.

“Tell me,” said the young man to the Talisman of Solomon, “what shall I
do, now that everything is gone?”

“Go,” said the Talisman of Solomon, “and work as thy father has worked
before thee. Advise with me and become prosperous and contended, but do
not go dig under the cherry-tree in the garden.”

“Why should I not dig under the cherry-tree in the garden?” says the
young man; “I will see what is there, at any rate.”

So he straightway took a spade and went out into the garden, where the
Talisman had told him not to go. He dug and dug under the cherry-tree,
and by-and-by his spade struck something hard. It was a vessel of brass,
and it was full of silver money. Upon the lid of the vessel were these
words, engraved in the handwriting of the old man who had died:

“My son, this vessel full of silver has been brought from the
treasure-house of the ancient kings of Egypt. Take this, then, that thou
findest; advise with the talisman; be wise and prosper.”

“And they call that the Talisman of Wisdom,” said the young man. “If I
had listened to it I never would have found this treasure.”

The next day he began to spend the money he had found, and his friends
soon gathered around him again.

The vessel of silver money lasted a week, and then it was all gone; not
a single piece was left.

Then the young man bethought himself again of the Talisman of Solomon.
“What shall I do now,” said he, “to save myself from ruin?”

“Earn thy bread with honest labor,” said the Talisman, “and I will teach
thee how to prosper; but do not dig beneath the fig-tree that stands by
the fountain in the garden.”

The young man did not tarry long after he heard what the Talisman had
said. He seized a spade and hurried away to the fig-tree in the garden
as fast as he could run. He dug and dug, and by-and-by his spade struck
something hard. It was a copper vessel, and it was filled with gold
money. Upon the lid of the vessel was engraved these words in the
handwriting of the old man who had gone: “My son, my son,” they said,
“thou hast been warned once; be warned again. The gold money in this
vessel has been brought from the treasure-house of the ancient kings
of Egypt. Take it; be advised by the Talisman of Solomon; be wise and
prosper.”

“And to think that if I had listened to the Talisman, I would never have
found this,” said the young man.

The gold in the vessel lasted maybe for a month of jollity and
merrymaking, but at the end of that time there was nothing left--not a
copper farthing.

“Tell me,” said the young man to the Talisman, “what shall I do now?”

“Thou fool,” said the Talisman, “go sweat and toil, but do not go down
into the vault beneath this house. There in the vault is a red stone
built into the wall. The red stone turns upon a pivot. Behind the stone
is a hollow space. As thou wouldst save thy life from peril, go not near
it!”

“Hear that now,” says the young man, “first, this Talisman told me not
to go, and I found silver. Then it told me not to go, and I found gold;
now it tells me not to go--perhaps I shall find precious stones enough
for a king’s ransom.”

He lit a lantern and went down into the vault beneath the house. There,
as the Talisman had said, was the red stone built into the wall. He
pressed the stone, and it turned upon its pivot as the Talisman had said
it would turn. Within was a hollow space, as the Talisman said there
would be. In the hollow space there was a casket of silver. The young
man snatched it up, and his hands trembled for joy.

Upon the lid of the box were these words in the father’s handwriting,
written in letters as red as blood: “Fool, fool! Thou hast been a fool
once, thou hast been a fool twice; be not a fool for a third time.
Restore this casket whence it was taken, and depart.”

“I will see what is in the box, at any rate,” said the young man.

He opened it. There was nothing in it but a hollow glass jar the size of
an egg. The young man took the jar from the box; it was as hot as fire.
He cried out and let it fall. The jar burst upon the floor with a crack
of thunder; the house shook and rocked, and the dust flew about in
clouds. Then all was still; and when Aben Hassen the Fool could see
through the cloud of terror that enveloped him he beheld a great, tall,
hideous being as black as ink, and with eyes that shone like coals of
fire.

When the young man saw that terrible creature his tongue clave to
the roof of his mouth, and his knees smote together with fear, for he
thought that his end had now certainly come.

“Who are you?” he croaked, as soon as he could find his voice.

“I am the King of the Demons of the Earth, and my name is Zadok,”
 answered the being. “I was once thy father’s slave, and now I am thine,
thou being his son. When thou speakest I must obey, and whatever thou
commandest me to do that I must do.”

“For instance, what can you do for me?” said the young man.

“I can do whatsoever you ask me; I can make you rich.”

“You can make me rich?”

“Yes, I can make you richer than a king.”

“Then make me rich as soon as you can,” said Aben Hassen the Fool, “and
that is all that I shall ask of you now.”

“It shall be done,” said the Demon; “spend all that thou canst spend,
and thou shalt always have more. Has my lord any further commands for
his slave?”

“No,” said the young man, “there is nothing more; you may go now.”

And thereupon the Demon vanished like a flash.

“And to think,” said the young man, as he came up out of the vault--“and
to think that all this I should never have found if I had obeyed the
Talisman.”

Such riches were never seen in that land as the young man now possessed.
There was no end to the treasure that poured in upon him. He lived like
an emperor. He built a palace more splendid than the palace of the king.
He laid out vast gardens of the most exquisite beauty, in which there
were fountains as white as snow, trees of rare fruit and flowers that
filled all the air with their perfume, summer-houses of alabaster and
ebony.

Every one who visited him was received like a prince, entertained like a
king, given a present fit for an emperor, and sent away happy. The fame
of all these things went out through all the land, and every one talked
of him and the magnificence that surrounded him.

It came at last to the ears of the king himself, and one day he said
to his minister, “Let us go and see with our own eyes if all the things
reported of this merchant’s son are true.”

So the king and his minister disguised themselves as foreign merchants,
and went that evening to the palace where the young man lived. A servant
dressed in clothes of gold and silver cloth stood at the door, and
called to them to come in and be made welcome. He led them in, and to a
chamber lit with perfumed lamps of gold. Then six black slaves took them
in charge and led them to a bath of white marble. They were bathed in
perfumed water and dried with towels of fine linen. When they came
forth they were clad in clothes of cloth of silver, stiff with gold and
jewels. Then twelve handsome white slaves led them through a vast and
splendid hall to a banqueting-room.

When they entered they were deafened with the noise of carousing and
merrymaking.

Aben Hassen the Fool sat at the head of the table upon a throne of
gold, with a canopy of gold above his head. When he saw the king and
the minister enter, he beckoned to them to come and sit beside him.
He showed them special favor because they were strangers, and special
servants waited upon them.

The king and his minister had never seen anything like what they then
saw. They could hardly believe it was not all magic and enchantment.
At the end of the feast each of the guests was given a present of great
value, and was sent away rejoicing. The king received a pearl as big as
a marble; the minister a cup of wrought gold.

The next morning the king and the prime-minister were talking over what
they had seen. “Sire,” said the prime-minister, “I have no doubt but
that the young man has discovered some vast hidden treasure. Now,
according to the laws of this kingdom, the half of any treasure that is
discovered shall belong to the king’s treasury. If I were in your place
I would send for this young man and compel him to tell me whence comes
all this vast wealth.”

“That is true,” said the king; “I had not thought of that before. The
young man shall tell me all about it.”

So they sent a royal guard and brought the young man to the king’s
palace. When the young man saw in the king and the prime-minister his
guests of the night before, whom he had thought to be only foreign
merchants, he fell on his face and kissed the ground before the throne.
But the king spoke to him kindly, and raised him up and sat him on the
seat beside him. They talked for a while concerning different things,
and then the king said at last, “Tell me, my friend, whence comes all
the inestimable wealth that you must possess to allow you to live as you
do?”

“Sire,” said the young man, “I cannot tell you whence it comes. I can
only tell you that it is given to me.”

The king frowned. “You cannot tell,” said he; “you must tell. It is for
that that I have sent for you, and you must tell me.”

Then the young man began to be frightened. “I beseech you,” said he, “do
not ask me whence it comes. I cannot tell you.”

Then the king’s brows grew as black as thunder. “What!” cried he, “do
you dare to bandy words with me? I know that you have discovered some
treasure. Tell me upon the instant where it is; for the half of it, by
the laws of the land, belongs to me, and I will have it.”

At the king’s words Aben Hassen the Fool fell on his knees. “Sire,”
 said he, “I will tell you all the truth. There is a demon named Zadok--a
monster as black as a coal. He is my slave, and it is he that brings me
all the treasure that I enjoy.” The king thought nothing else than that
Aben Hassen the Fool was trying to deceive him. He laughed; he was
very angry. “What,” cried he, “do you amuse me by such an absurd and
unbelievable tale? Now I am more than ever sure that you have discovered
a treasure and that you wish to keep the knowledge of it from me,
knowing, as you do, that the one-half of it by law belongs to me. Take
him away!” cried he to his attendants. “Give him fifty lashes, and throw
him into prison. He shall stay there and have fifty lashes every day
until he tells me where his wealth is hidden.”

It was done as the king said, and by-and-by Aben Hassen the Fool lay in
the prison, smarting and sore with the whipping he had had.

Then he began again to think of the Talisman of Solomon.

“Tell me,” said he to the Talisman, “What shall I do now to help myself
in this trouble?”

“Bear thy punishment, thou fool,” said the Talisman. “Know that the king
will by-and-by pardon thee and will let thee go. In the meantime bear
thy punishment; perhaps it will cure thee of thy folly. Only do not call
upon Zadok, the King of the Demons, in this thy trouble.”

The young man smote his hand upon his head. “What a fool I am,” said
he, “not to have thought to call upon Zadok before this!” Then he called
aloud, “Zadok, Zadok! If thou art indeed my slave, come hither at my
bidding.”

In an instant there sounded a rumble as of thunder. The floor swayed and
rocked beneath the young man’s feet. The dust flew in clouds, and there
stood Zadok as black as ink, and with eyes that shone like coals of
fire.

“I have come,” said Zadok, “and first let me cure thy smarts, O master.”

He removed the cloths from the young man’s back, and rubbed the places
that smarted with a cooling unguent. Instantly the pain and smarting
ceased, and the merchant’s son had perfect ease.

“Now,” said Zadok, “what is thy bidding?”

“Tell me,” said Aben Hassen the Fool, “whence comes all the wealth that
you have brought me? The king has commanded me to tell him and I could
not, and so he has had me beaten with fifty lashes.”

“I bring the treasure,” said Zadok, “from the treasure-house of the
ancient kings of Egypt. That treasure I at one time discovered to your
father, and he, not desiring it himself, hid it in the earth so that no
one might find it.”

“And where is this treasure-house, O Zadok?” said the young man.

“It is in the city of the queen of the Black Isles,” said the King of
the Demons; “there thy father lived in a palace of such magnificence
as thou hast never dreamed of. It was I that brought him thence to this
place with one vessel of gold money and one vessel of silver money.”

“It was you who brought him here, did you say, Zadok? Then, tell me,
can you take me from here to the city of the queen of the Black Isles,
whence you brought him?”

“Yes,” said Zadok, “with ease.”

“Then,” said the young man, “I command you to take me thither instantly,
and to show me the treasure.”

“I obey,” said Zadok.

He stamped his foot upon the ground. In an instant the walls of the
prison split asunder, and the sky was above them. The Demon leaped from
the earth, carrying the young man by the girdle, and flew through the
air so swiftly that the stars appeared to slide away behind them. In a
moment he set the young man again upon the ground, and Aben Hassen the
Fool found himself at the end of what appeared to be a vast and splendid
garden.

“We are now,” said Zadok, “above the treasure-house of which I spoke. It
was here that I saw thy father seal it so that no one but the master of
Zadok may enter. Thou mayst go in any time it may please thee, for it is
thine.”

“I would enter into it now,” said Aben Hassen the Fool.

“Thou shalt enter,” said Zadok. He stooped, and with his finger-point he
drew a circle upon the ground where they stood; then he stamped with his
heel upon the circle. Instantly the earth opened, and there appeared a
flight of marble steps leading downward into the earth. Zadok led the
way down the steps and the young man followed. At the bottom of the
steps there was a door of adamant. Upon the door were these words in
letters as black as ink, in the handwriting of the old man who had gone:

“Oh, fool! Fool! Beware what thou doest. Within here shalt thou find
death!”

There was a key of brass in the door. The King of the Demons turned the
key and opened the door. The young man entered after him.

Aben Hassen the Fool found himself in a vast vaulted room, lit by the
light of a single carbuncle set in the centre of the dome above. In the
middle of the marble floor was a great basin twenty paces broad, and
filled to the brim with money such as he had found in the brazen vessel
in the garden.

The young man could not believe what he saw with his own eyes. “Oh,
marvel of marvels!” he cried; “little wonder you could give me boundless
wealth from such a storehouse as this.”

Zadok laughed. “This,” said he, “is nothing; come with me.”

He led him from this room to another--like it vaulted, and like it lit
by a carbuncle set in the dome of the roof above. In the middle of the
floor was a basin such as Aben Hassen the Fool had seen in the other
room beyond; only this was filled with gold as that had been filled with
silver, and the gold was like that he had found in the garden. When
the young man saw this vast and amazing wealth he stood speechless and
breathless with wonder. The Demon Zadok laughed. “This,” said he, “is
great, but it is little. Come and I will show thee a marvel indeed.”

He took the young man by the hand and led him into a third room--vaulted
as the other two had been, lit as they had been by a carbuncle in the
roof above. But when the young man’s eyes saw what was in this third
room, he was like a man turned drunk with wonder. He had to lean against
the wall behind him, for the sight made him dizzy.

In the middle of the room was such as basin as he had seen in the two
other rooms, only it was filled with jewels--diamonds and rubies and
emeralds and sapphires and precious stones of all kinds--that sparkled
and blazed and flamed like a million stars. Around the wall, and facing
the basin from all sides, stood six golden statues. Three of them were
statues of the kings and three of them were statues of the queens who
had gathered together all this vast and measureless wealth of ancient
Egypt.

There was space for a seventh statue, but where it should have stood was
a great arched door of adamant. The door was tightly shut, and there was
neither lock nor key to it. Upon the door were written these words in
letters of flame:

“Behold! Beyond this door is that alone which shall satisfy all thy
desires.”

“Tell me, Zadok,” said the young man, after he had filled his soul with
all the other wonders that surrounded him--“tell me what is there that
lies beyond that door?”

“That I am forbidden to tell thee, O master!” said the King of the
Demons of the Earth.

“Then open the door for me,” said the young man; “for I cannot open it
for myself, as there is neither lock nor key to it.”

“That also I am forbidden to do,” said Zadok.

“I wish that I knew what was there,” said the young man.

The Demon laughed. “Some time,” said he, “thou mayest find for thyself.
Come, let us leave here and go to the palace which thy father built
years ago, and which he left behind him when he quitted this place for
the place in which thou knewest him.”

He led the way and the young man followed; they passed through the
vaulted rooms and out through the door of adamant, and Zadok locked it
behind them and gave the key to the young man.

“All this is thine now,” he said; “I give it to thee as I gave it to thy
father. I have shown thee how to enter, and thou mayst go in whenever it
pleases thee to do so.”

They ascended the steps, and so reached the garden above. Then Zadok
struck his heel upon the ground, and the earth closed as it had opened.
He led the young man from the spot until they had come to a wide avenue
that led to the palace beyond. “Here I leave thee,” said the Demon, “But
if ever thou hast need of me, call and I will come.”

Thereupon he vanished like a flash, leaving the young man standing like
one in a dream.

He saw before him a garden of such splendor and magnificence as he had
never dreamed of even in his wildest fancy. There were seven fountains
as clear as crystal that shot high into the air and fell back into
basins of alabaster. There was a broad avenue as white as snow, and
thousands of lights lit up everything as light as day. Upon either side
of the avenue stood a row of black slaves, clad in garments of white
silk, and with jewelled turbans upon their heads. Each held a flaming
torch of sandal-wood. Behind the slaves stood a double row of armed men,
and behind them a great crowd of other slaves and attendants, dressed
each as magnificently as a prince, blazing and flaming with innumerable
jewels and ornaments of gold.

But of all these things the young man thought nothing and saw nothing;
for at the end of the marble avenue there arose a palace, the like of
which was not in the four quarters of the earth--a palace of marble and
gold and carmine and ultramarine--rising into the purple starry sky,
and shining in the moonlight like a vision of Paradise. The palace was
illuminated from top to bottom and from end to end; the windows shone
like crystal, and from it came sounds of music and rejoicing.

When the crowd that stood waiting saw the young man appear, they
shouted: “Welcome! Welcome! To the master who has come again! To Aben
Hassen the Fool!”

The young man walked up the avenue of marble to the palace, surrounded
by the armed attendants in their dresses of jewels and gold, and
preceded by dancing-girls as beautiful as houris, who danced and sung
before him. He was dizzy with joy. “All--all this,” he exulted, “belongs
to me. And to think that if I had listened to the Talisman of Solomon I
would have had none of it.”

That was the way he came back to the treasure of the ancient kings of
Egypt, and to the palace of enchantment that his father had quitted.

For seven months he lived a life of joy and delight, surrounded by
crowds of courtiers as though they were a king, and going from pleasure
to pleasure without end. Nor had he any fear of an end coming to it, for
he knew that his treasure was inexhaustible. He made friends with the
princes and nobles of the land. From far and wide people came to visit
him, and the renown of his magnificence filled all the world. When
men would praise any one they would say, “He is as rich,” or as
“magnificent,” or as “generous, as Aben Hassen the Fool.”

So for seven months he lived a life of joy and delight; then one morning
he awakened and found everything changed to grief and mourning. Where
the day before had been laughter, to-day was crying. Where the day
before had been mirth, to-day was lamentation. All the city was shrouded
in gloom, and everywhere was weeping and crying.

Seven black slaves stood on guard near Aben Hassen the Fool as he lay
upon his couch. “What means all this sorrow?” said he to one of the
slaves.

Instantly all the slaves began howling and beating their heads, and he
to whom the young man had spoken fell down with his face in the dust,
and lay there twisting and writhing like a worm.

“He has asked the question!” howled the slaves--“he has asked the
question!”

“Are you mad?” cried the young man. “What is the matter with you?”

At the doorway of the room stood a beautiful female slave, bearing in
her hands a jewelled basin of gold, filled with rose-water, and a fine
linen napkin for the young man to wash and dry his hands upon. “Tell
me,” said the young man, “what means all this sorrow and lamentation?”

Instantly the beautiful slave dropped the golden basin upon the stone
floor, and began shrieking and tearing her clothes. “He has asked the
question!” she screamed--“he has asked the question!”

The young man began to grow frightened; he arose from his couch,
and with uneven steps went out into the anteroom. There he found his
chamberlain waiting for him with a crowd of attendants and courtiers.
“Tell me,” said Aben Hassen the Fool, “why are you all so sorrowful?”

Instantly they who stood waiting began crying and tearing their clothes
and beating their hands. As for the chamberlain--he was a reverend old
man--his eyes sparkled with anger, and his fingers twitched as though
he would have struck if he had dared. “What,” he cried, “art thou not
contented with all thou hast and with all that we do for thee without
asking the forbidden question?”

Thereupon he tore his cap from his head and flung it upon the ground,
and began beating himself violently upon the head with great outcrying.

Aben Hassen the Fool, not knowing what to think or what was to happen,
ran back into the bedroom again. “I think everybody in this place has
gone mad,” said he. “Nevertheless, if I do not find out what it all
means, I shall go mad myself.”

Then he bethought himself, for the first time since he came to that
land, of the Talisman of Solomon.

“Tell me, O Talisman,” said he, “why all these people weep and wail so
continuously?”

“Rest content,” said the Talisman of Solomon, “with knowing that which
concerns thine own self, and seek not to find an answer that will be
to thine own undoing. Be thou also further advised: do not question the
Demon Zadok.”

“Fool that I am,” said the young man, stamping his foot; “here am I
wasting all this time when, if I had but thought of Zadok at first, he
would have told me all. Then he called aloud, Zadok! Zadok! Zadok!”

Instantly the ground shook beneath his feet, the dust rose in clouds,
and there stood Zadok as black as ink, and with eyes that shone like
fire.

“Tell me,” said the young man; “I command thee to tell me, O Zadok! Why
are the people all gone mad this morning, and why do they weep and
wail, and why do they go crazy when I do but ask them why they are so
afflicted?”

“I will tell thee,” said Zadok. “Seven-and-thirty years ago there was a
queen over this land--the most beautiful that ever was seen. Thy father,
who was the wisest and most cunning magician in the world, turned her
into stone, and with her all the attendants in her palace. No one since
that time has been permitted to enter the palace--it is forbidden for
any one even to ask a question concerning it; but every year, on the
day on which the queen was turned to stone, the whole land mourns with
weeping and wailing. And now thou knowest all!”

“What you tell me,” said the young man, “passes wonder. But tell me
further, O Zadok, is it possible for me to see this queen whom my father
turned to stone?”

“Nothing is easier,” said Zadok.

“Then,” said the young man, “I command you to take me to where she is,
so that I may see her with mine own eyes.”

“I hear and obey,” said the Demon.

He seized the young man by the girdle, and in an instant flew away with
him to a hanging-garden that lay before the queen’s palace.

“Thou art the first man,” said Zadok, “who has seen what thou art about
to see for seven-and-thirty years. Come, I will show thee a queen, the
most beautiful that the eyes of man ever looked upon.”

He led the way, and the young man followed, filled with wonder and
astonishment. Not a sound was to be heard, not a thing moved, but
silence hung like a veil between the earth and the sky.

Following the Demon, the young man ascended a flight of steps, and so
entered the vestibule of the palace. There stood guards in armor of
brass and silver and gold. But they were without life--they were all of
stone as white as alabaster. Thence they passed through room after room
and apartment after apartment crowded with courtiers and nobles and
lords in their robes of office, magnificent beyond fancying, but each
silent and motionless--each a stone as white as alabaster. At last
they entered an apartment in the very centre of the palace. There sat
seven-and-forty female attendants around a couch of purple and gold.
Each of the seven-and-forty was beautiful beyond what the young man
could have believed possible, and each was clad in a garment of silk
as white as snow, embroidered with threads of silver and studded with
glistening diamonds. But each sat silent and motionless--each was a
stone as white as alabaster.

Upon the couch in the centre of the apartment reclined a queen with a
crown of gold upon her head. She lay there motionless, still. She was
cold and dead--of stone as white as marble. The young man approached and
looked into her face, and when he looked his breath became faint and his
heart grew soft within him like wax in a flame of fire.

He sighed; he melted; the tears burst from his eyes and ran down his
cheeks. “Zadok!” he cried--“Zadok! Zadok! What have you done to show
me this wonder of beauty and love! Alas! That I have seen her; for the
world is nothing to me now. O Zadok! That she were flesh and blood,
instead of cold stone! Tell me, Zadok, I command you to tell me, was
she once really alive as I am alive, and did my father truly turn her to
stone as she lies here?”

“She was really alive as thou art alive, and he did truly transform her
to this stone,” said Zadok.

“And tell me,” said the young man, “can she never become alive again?”

“She can become alive, and it lies with you to make her alive,” said the
Demon. “Listen, O master. Thy father possessed a wand, half of silver
and half of gold. Whatsoever he touched with silver became converted
to stone, such as thou seest all around thee here; but whatsoever, O
master, he touched with the gold, it became alive, even if it were a
dead stone.”

“Tell me, Zadok,” cried the young man; “I command you to tell me, where
is that wand of silver and gold?”

“I have it with me,” said Zadok.

“Then give it to me; I command you to give it to me.”

“I hear and obey,” said Zadok. He drew from his girdle a wand, half of
gold and half of silver, as he spoke, and gave it to the young man.

“Thou mayst go now, Zadok,” said the young man, trembling with
eagerness.

Zadok laughed and vanished. The young man stood for a while looking down
at the beautiful figure of alabaster. Then he touched the lips with the
golden tip of the wand. In an instant there came a marvellous change.
He saw the stone melt, and begin to grow flexible and soft. He saw it
become warm, and the cheeks and lips grow red with life. Meantime a
murmur had begun to rise all through the palace. It grew louder and
louder--it became a shout. The figure of the queen that had been stone
opened its eyes.

“Who are you?” it said.

Aben Hassen the Fool fell upon his knees. “I am he who was sent to bring
you to life.” he said. “My father turned you to cold stone, and I--I
have brought you back to warm life again.”

The queen smiled--her teeth sparkled like pearls. “If you have brought
me to life, then I am yours,” she said, and she kissed him upon the
lips.

He grew suddenly dizzy; the world swam before his eyes.

For seven days nothing was heard in the town but rejoicing and joy. The
young man lived in a golden cloud of delight. “And to think,” said he,
“if I had listened to that accursed Talisman of Solomon, called The
Wise,’ all this happiness, this ecstasy that is now mine, would have
been lost to me.”

“Tell me, beloved,” said the queen, upon the morning of the seventh
day--“thy father once possessed all the hidden treasure of the ancient
kings of Egypt--tell me, is it now thine as it was once his?”

“Yes,” said the young man, “it is now all mine as it was once all his.”

“And do you really love me as you say?”

“Yes,” said the young man, “and ten thousand times more than I say.”

“Then, as you love me, I beg one boon on you. It is that you show me
this treasure of which I have heard so much, and which we are to enjoy
together.”

The young man was drunk with happiness. “Thou shalt see it all,” said
he.

Then, for the first time, the Talisman spoke without being questioned.
“Fool!” it cried; “wilt thou not be advised?”

“Be silent,” said the young man. “Six times, vile thing, you would have
betrayed me. Six times you would have deprived me of joys that should
have been mine, and each was greater than that which went before. Shall
I now listen the seventh time? Now,” said he to the queen, “I will show
you our treasure.” He called aloud, “Zadok, Zadok, Zadok!”

Instantly the ground shook beneath their feet, the dust rose in clouds,
and Zadok appeared, as black as ink, and with eyes that shone like coals
of fire.

“I command you,” said the young man, “to carry the queen and myself to
the garden where my treasure lies hidden.”

Zadok laughed aloud. “I hear thee and obey thee, master,” said he.

He seized the queen and the young man by the girdle, and in an instant
transported them to the garden and to the treasure-house.

“Thou art where thou commandest to be,” said the Demon.

The young man immediately drew a circle upon the ground with his
finger-tip. He struck his heel upon the circle. The ground opened,
disclosing the steps leading downward. The young man descended the steps
with the queen behind him, and behind them both came the Demon Zadok.

The young man opened the door of adamant and entered the first of the
vaulted rooms.

When the queen saw the huge basin full of silver treasure, her cheeks
and her forehead flushed as red as fire.

They went into the next room, and when the queen saw the basin of gold
her face turned as white as ashes.

They went into the third room, and when the queen saw the basin of
jewels and the six golden statues her face turned as blue as lead, and
her eyes shone green like a snake’s.

“Are you content?” asked the young man.

The queen looked about her. “No!” cried she, hoarsely, pointing to the
closed door that had never been opened, and whereon were engraved these
words:

“Behold! Beyond this door is that alone which shall satisfy all thy
desires.”

“No!” cried she. “What is it that lies behind yon door?”

“I do not know,” said the young man.

“Then open the door, and let me see what lies within.”

“I cannot open the door,” said he. “How can I open the door, seeing that
there is no lock nor key to it?”

“If thou dost not open the door,” said the queen, “all is over between
thee and me. So do as I bid thee, or leave me forever.”

They had both forgotten that the Demon Zadok was there. Then the young
man bethought himself of the Talisman of Solomon. “Tell me, O Talisman,”
 said he, “how shall I open yonder door?”

“Oh, wretched one!” cried the Talisman, “oh, wretched one! Fly while
there is yet time--fly, for thy doom is near! Do not push the door open,
for it is not locked!”

The young man struck his head with his clinched fist. “What a fool am
I!” he cried. “Will I never learn wisdom. Here have I been coming to
this place seven months, and have never yet thought to try whether
yonder door was locked or not!”

“Open the door!” cried the queen.

They went forward together. The young man pushed the door with his hand.
It opened swiftly and silently, and they entered.

Within was a narrow room as red as blood. A flaming lamp hung from the
ceiling above. The young man stood as though turned to stone, for there
stood a gigantic Black Demon with a napkin wrapped around his loins and
a scimitar in his right hand, the blade of which gleamed like lightning
in the flame of the lamp. Before him lay a basket filled with sawdust.

When the queen saw what she saw she screamed in a loud voice, “Thou hast
found it! Thou hast found it! Thou hast found what alone can satisfy all
thy desires! Strike, O slave!”

The young man heard the Demon Zadok give a yell of laughter. He saw a
whirl and a flash, and then he knew nothing.

The Black had struck--the blade had fallen, and the head of Aben Hassen
the Fool rolled into the basket of sawdust that stood waiting for it.

“Aye, aye,” said St. George, “and so it should end. For what was your
Aben Hassen the Fool but a heathen Paniem? Thus should the heads of all
the like be chopped off from their shoulders. Is there not some one here
to tell us a fair story about a saint?”

“For the matter of that,” said the Lad who fiddled when the Jew was in
the bramble-bush--“for the matter of that I know a very good story that
begins about a saint and a hazel-nut.

“Say you so?” said St. George. “Well, let us have it. But stay, friend,
thou hast no ale in thy pot. Wilt thou not let me pay for having it
filled?”

“That,” said the Lad who fiddled when the Jew was in the bramble-bush,
“may be as you please, Sir Knight; and, to tell the truth, I will be
mightily glad for a drop to moisten my throat withal.”

“But,” said Fortunatus, “you have not told us what the story is to be
about.”

“It is,” said the Lad who fiddled for the Jew in the bramble-bush,
“about--”




Ill-Luck and the Fiddler

Once upon a time St. Nicholas came down into the world to take a peep
at the old place and see how things looked in the spring-time. On he
stepped along the road to the town where he used to live, for he had
a notion to find out whether things were going on nowadays as they
one time did. By-and-by he came to a cross-road, and who should he
see sitting there but Ill-Luck himself. Ill-Luck’s face was as gray as
ashes, and his hair as white as snow--for he is as old as Grandfather
Adam--and two great wings grew out of his shoulders--for he flies fast
and comes quickly to those whom he visits, does Ill-Luck.

Now, St. Nicholas had a pocketful of hazel-nuts, which he kept cracking
and eating as he trudged along the road, and just then he came upon one
with a worm-hole in it. When he saw Ill-Luck it came into his head to do
a good turn to poor sorrowful man.

“Good-morning, Ill-Luck,” says he.

“Good-morning, St. Nicholas,” says Ill-Luck.

“You look as hale and strong as ever,” says St. Nicholas.

“Ah, yes,” says Ill-Luck, “I find plenty to do in this world of woe.”

“They tell me,” says St. Nicholas, “that you can go wherever you choose,
even if it be through a key-hole; now, is that so?”

“Yes,” says Ill-Luck, “it is.”

“Well, look now, friend,” says St. Nicholas, “could you go into this
hazel-nut if you chose to?”

“Yes,” says Ill-Luck, “I could indeed.”

“I should like to see you,” says St. Nicholas; “for then I should be of
a mind to believe what people say of you.”

“Well,” says Ill-Luck, “I have not much time to be pottering and playing
upon Jack’s fiddle; but to oblige an old friend”--thereupon he made
himself small and smaller, and--phst! he was in the nut before you could
wink.

Then what do you think St. Nicholas did? In his hand he held a little
plug of wood, and no sooner had Ill-Luck entered the nut than he stuck
the plug in the hole, and there was man’s enemy as tight as fly in a
bottle.

“So!” says St. Nicholas, “that’s a piece of work well done.” Then he
tossed the hazel-nut under the roots of an oak-tree near by, and went
his way.

And that is how this story begins.

Well, the hazel-nut lay and lay and lay, and all the time that it lay
there nobody met with ill-luck; but, one day, who should come travelling
that way but a rogue of a Fiddler, with his fiddle under his arm. The
day was warm, and he was tired; so down he sat under the shade of the
oak-tree to rest his legs. By-and-by he heard a little shrill voice
piping and crying, “Let me out! let me out! let me out!”

The Fiddler looked up and down, but he could see nobody. “Who are you?”
 says he.

“I am Ill-Luck! Let me out! let me out!”

“Let you out?” says the Fiddler. “Not I; if you are bottled up here it
is the better for all of us;” and, so saying, he tucked his fiddle under
his arm and off he marched.

But before he had gone six steps he stopped. He was one of your peering,
prying sort, and liked more than a little to know all that was to be
known about this or that or the other thing that he chanced to see or
hear. “I wonder where Ill-Luck can be, to be in such a tight place as
he seems to be caught in,” says he to himself; and back he came again.
“Where are you, Ill-Luck?” says he.

“Here I am,” says Ill-Luck--“here in this hazel-nut, under the roots of
the oak-tree.”

Thereupon the Fiddler laid aside his fiddle and bow, and fell to
poking and prying under the roots until he found the nut. Then he began
twisting and turning it in his fingers, looking first on one side and
then on the other, and all the while Ill-Luck kept crying, “Let me out!
let me out!”

It was not long before the Fiddler found the little wooden plug, and
then nothing would do but he must take a peep inside the nut to see if
Ill-Luck was really there. So he picked and pulled at the wooden plug,
until at last out it came; and--phst! pop! out came Ill-Luck along with
it.

Plague take the Fiddler! say I.

“Listen,” says Ill-Luck. “It has been many a long day that I have been
in that hazel-nut, and you are the man that has let me out; for once
in a way I will do a good turn to a poor human body.” Therewith, and
without giving the Fiddler time to speak a word, Ill-Luck caught him up
by the belt, and--whiz! away he flew like a bullet, over hill and over
valley; over moor and over mountain, so fast that not enough wind was
left in the Fiddler’s stomach to say “Bo!”

By-and-by he came to a garden, and there he let the Fiddler drop on
the soft grass below. Then away he flew to attend to other matters of
greater need.

When the Fiddler had gathered his wits together, and himself to
his feet, he saw that he lay in a beautiful garden of flowers and
fruit-trees and marble walks and what not, and that at the end of
it stood a great, splendid house, all built of white marble, with a
fountain in front, and peacocks strutting about on the lawn.

Well, the Fiddler smoothed down his hair and brushed his clothes a bit,
and off he went to see what was to be seen at the grand house at the end
of the garden.

He entered the door, and nobody said no to him. Then he passed through
one room after another, and each was finer than the one he left behind.
Many servants stood around; but they only bowed, and never asked whence
he came. At last he came to a room where a little old man sat at a
table. The table was spread with a feast that smelled so good that it
brought tears to the Fiddler’s eyes and water to his mouth, and all
the plates were of pure gold. The little old man sat alone, but another
place was spread, as though he were expecting some one. As the Fiddler
came in the little old man nodded and smiled. “Welcome!” he cried; “and
have you come at last?”

“Yes,” said the Fiddler, “I have. It was Ill-Luck that brought me.”

“Nay,” said the little old man, “do not say that. Sit down to the table
and eat; and when I have told you all, you will say it was not Ill-Luck,
but Good-Luck, that brought you.”

The Fiddler had his own mind about that; but, all the same, down he sat
at the table, and fell to with knife and fork at the good things, as
though he had not had a bite to eat for a week of Sundays.

“I am the richest man in the world,” says the little old man, after a
while.

“I am glad to hear it,” says the Fiddler.

“You may well be,” said the old man, “for I am all alone in the world,
and without wife or child. And this morning I said to myself that the
first body that came to my house I would take for a son--or a daughter,
as the case might be. You are the first, and so you shall live with me
as long as I live, and after I am gone everything that I have shall be
yours.”

The Fiddler did nothing but stare with open eyes and mouth, as though he
would never shut either again.

Well, the Fiddler lived with the old man for maybe three or four days as
snug and happy a life as ever a mouse passed in a green cheese. As for
the gold and silver and jewels--why, they were as plentiful in that
house as dust in a mill! Everything the Fiddler wanted came to his hand.
He lived high, and slept soft and warm, and never knew what it was to
want either more or less, or great or small. In all of those three or
four days he did nothing but enjoy himself with might and main.

But by-and-by he began to wonder where all the good things came from.
Then, before long, he fell to pestering the old man with questions about
the matter.

At first the old man put him off with short answers, but the Fiddler was
a master-hand at finding out anything he wanted to know. He dinned and
drummed and worried until flesh and blood could stand it no longer. So
at last the old man said that he would show him the treasure-house where
all his wealth came from, and at that the Fiddler was tickled beyond
measure.

The old man took a key from behind the door and led him out into the
garden. There in a corner by the wall was a great trap-door of iron. The
old man fitted the key to the lock and turned it. He lifted the door,
and then went down a steep flight of stone steps, and the Fiddler
followed close at his heels. Down below it was as light as day, for in
the centre of the room hung a great lamp that shone with a bright light
and lit up all the place as bright as day. In the floor were set three
great basins of marble: one was nearly full of silver, one of gold, and
one of gems of all sorts.

“All this is mine,” said the old man, “and after I am gone it shall be
yours. It was left to me as I will leave it to you, and in the meantime
you may come and go as you choose and fill your pockets whenever you
wish to. But there is one thing you must not do: you must never open
that door yonder at the back of the room. Should you do so, Ill-Luck
will be sure to overtake you.”

Oh no! The Fiddler would never think of doing such a thing as opening
the door. The silver and gold and jewels were enough for him. But since
the old man had given him leave, he would just help himself to a few of
the fine things. So he stuffed his pockets full, and then he followed
the old man up the steps and out into the sunlight again.

It took him maybe an hour to count all the money and jewels he had
brought up with him. After he had done that, he began to wonder what was
inside of the little door at the back of the room. First he wondered;
then he began to grow curious; then he began to itch and tingle and burn
as though fifty thousand I-want-to-know nettles were sticking into him
from top to toe. At last he could stand it no longer. “I’ll just go down
yonder,” says he, “and peep through the key-hole; perhaps I can see what
is there without opening the door.”

So down he took the key, and off he marched to the garden. He opened the
trap-door, and went down the steep steps to the room below. There was
the door at the end of the room, but when he came to look there was no
key-hole to it. “Pshaw!” said he, “here is a pretty state of affairs.
Tut! tut! tut! Well, since I have come so far, it would be a pity to
turn back without seeing more.” So he opened the door and peeped in.

“Pooh!” said the Fiddler, “There’s nothing there, after all,” and he
opened the door wide.

Before him was a great long passageway, and at the far end of it he
could see a spark of light as though the sun were shining there. He
listened, and after a while he heard a sound like the waves beating on
the shore. “Well,” says he, “this is the most curious thing I have seen
for a long time. Since I have come so far, I may as well see the end of
it.” So he entered the passageway, and closed the door behind him. He
went on and on, and the spark of light kept growing larger and larger,
and by-and-by--pop! out he came at the other end of the passage.

Sure enough, there he stood on the sea-shore, with the waves beating and
dashing on the rocks. He stood looking and wondering to find himself in
such a place, when all of a sudden something came with a whiz and a rush
and caught him by the belt, and away he flew like a bullet.

By-and-by he managed to screw his head around and look up, and there it
was Ill-Luck that had him. “I thought so,” said the Fiddler; and then he
gave over kicking.

Well; on and on they flew, over hill and valley, over moor and mountain,
until they came to another garden, and there Ill-Luck let the Fiddler
drop.

Swash! Down he fell into the top of an apple-tree, and there he hung in
the branches.

It was the garden of a royal castle, and all had been weeping and woe
(though they were beginning now to pick up their smiles again), and this
was the reason why:

The king of that country had died, and no one was left behind him but
the queen. But she was a prize, for not only was the kingdom hers, but
she was as young as a spring apple and as pretty as a picture; so that
there was no end of those who would have liked to have had her, each man
for his own. Even that day there were three princes at the castle, each
one wanting the queen to marry him; and the wrangling and bickering and
squabbling that was going on was enough to deafen a body. The poor young
queen was tired to death with it all, and so she had come out into
the garden for a bit of rest; and there she sat under the shade of an
apple-tree, fanning herself and crying, when--

Swash! Down fell the Fiddler into the apple-tree and down fell a dozen
apples, popping and tumbling about the queen’s ears.

The queen looked up and screamed, and the Fiddler climbed down.

“Where did you come from?” said she.

“Oh, Ill-Luck brought me,” said the Fiddler.

“Nay,” said the queen, “do not say so. You fell from heaven, for I saw
it with my eyes and heard it with my ears. I see how it is now. You were
sent hither from heaven to be my husband, and my husband you shall be.
You shall be king of this country, half-and-half with me as queen, and
shall sit on a throne beside me.”

You can guess whether or not that was music to the Fiddler’s ears.

So the princes were sent packing, and the Fiddler was married to the
queen, and reigned in that country.

Well, three or four days passed, and all was as sweet and happy as a
spring day. But at the end of that time the Fiddler began to wonder what
was to be seen in the castle. The queen was very fond of him, and was
glad enough to show him all the fine things that were to be seen; so
hand in hand they went everywhere, from garret to cellar.

But you should have seen how splendid it all was! The Fiddler felt more
certain than ever that it was better to be a king than to be the richest
man in the world, and he was as glad as glad could be that Ill-Luck had
brought him from the rich little old man over yonder to this.

So he saw everything in the castle but one thing. “What is behind that
door?” said he.

“Ah! that,” said the queen, “you must not ask or wish to know. Should
you open that door Ill-Luck will be sure to overtake you.”

“Pooh!” said the Fiddler, “I don’t care to know, anyhow,” and off they
went, hand in hand.

Yes, that was a very fine thing to say; but before an hour had gone
by the Fiddler’s head began to hum and buzz like a beehive. “I don’t
believe,” said he, “there would be a grain of harm in my peeping inside
that door; all the same, I will not do it. I will just go down and peep
through the key-hole.” So off he went to do as he said; but there was
no key-hole to that door, either. “Why, look!” says he, “it is just like
the door at the rich man’s house over yonder; I wonder if it is the same
inside as outside,” and he opened the door and peeped in. Yes; there was
the long passage and the spark of light at the far end, as though the
sun were shining. He cocked his head to one side and listened. “Yes,”
 said he, “I think I hear the water rushing, but I am not sure; I will
just go a little further in and listen,” and so he entered and closed
the door behind him. Well, he went on and on until--pop! there he was
out at the farther end, and before he knew what he was about he had
stepped out upon the sea-shore, just as he had done before.

Whiz! whirr! Away flew the Fiddler like a bullet, and there was Ill-Luck
carrying him by the belt again. Away they sped, over hill and valley,
over moor and mountain, until the Fiddler’s head grew so dizzy that
he had to shut his eyes. Suddenly Ill-Luck let him drop, and down he
fell--thump! bump!--on the hard ground. Then he opened his eyes and sat
up, and, lo and behold! there he was, under the oak-tree whence he had
started in the first place. There lay his fiddle, just as he had left
it. He picked it up and ran his fingers over the strings--trum, twang!
Then he got to his feet and brushed the dirt and grass from his knees.
He tucked his fiddle under his arm, and off he stepped upon the way he
had been going at first.

“Just to think!” said he, “I would either have been the richest man
in the world, or else I would have been a king, if it had not been for
Ill-Luck.”

And that is the way we all of us talk.


Dr. Faustus had sat all the while neither drinking ale nor smoking
tobacco, but with his hands folded, and in silence. “I know not why it
is,” said he, “but that story of yours, my friend, brings to my mind
a story of a man whom I once knew--a great magician in his time, and
a necromancer and a chemist and an alchemist and mathematician and a
rhetorician, an astronomer, an astrologer, and a philosopher as well.”

“Tis a long list of excellency,” said old Bidpai.

“Tis not as long as was his head,” said Dr. Faustus.

“It would be good for us all to hear a story of such a man,” said old
Bidpai.

“Nay,” said Dr. Faustus, “the story is not altogether of the man
himself, but rather of a pupil who came to learn wisdom of him.”

“And the name of your story is what?” said Fortunatus.

“It hath no name,” said Dr. Faustus.

“Nay,” said St. George, “everything must have a name.”

“It hath no name,” said Dr. Faustus. “But I shall give it a name, and it
shall be--”




Empty Bottles

In the old, old days when men were wiser than they are in these times,
there lived a great philosopher and magician, by name Nicholas Flamel.
Not only did he know all the actual sciences, but the black arts as
well, and magic, and what not. He conjured demons so that when a body
passed the house of a moonlight night a body might see imps, great and
small, little and big, sitting on the chimney stacks and the ridge-pole,
clattering their heels on the tiles and chatting together.

He could change iron and lead into silver and gold; he discovered the
elixir of life, and might have been living even to this day had he
thought it worth while to do so.

There was a student at the university whose name was Gebhart, who was so
well acquainted with algebra and geometry that he could tell at a single
glance how many drops of water there were in a bottle of wine. As
for Latin and Greek--he could patter them off like his A B C’s.
Nevertheless, he was not satisfied with the things he knew, but was for
learning the things that no schools could teach him. So one day he came
knocking at Nicholas Flamel’s door.

“Come in,” said the wise man, and there Gebhart found him sitting in the
midst of his books and bottles and diagrams and dust and chemicals and
cobwebs, making strange figures upon the table with jackstraws and a
piece of chalk--for your true wise man can squeeze more learning out of
jackstraws and a piece of chalk than we common folk can get out of all
the books in the world.

No one else was in the room but the wise man’s servant, whose name was
Babette.

“What is it you want?” said the wise man, looking at Gebhart over the
rim of his spectacles.

“Master,” said Gebhart, “I have studied day after day at the university,
and from early in the morning until late at night, so that my head has
hummed and my eyes were sore, yet I have not learned those things that
I wish most of all to know--the arts that no one but you can teach. Will
you take me as your pupil?”

The wise man shook his head.

“Many would like to be as wise as that,” said he, “and few there be who
can become so. Now tell me. Suppose all the riches of the world were
offered to you, would you rather be wise?”

“Yes.”

“Suppose you might have all the rank and power of a king or of an
emperor, would you rather be wise?”

“Yes.”

“Suppose I undertook to teach you, would you give up everything of joy
and of pleasure to follow me?”

“Yes.”

“Perhaps you are hungry,” said the master.

“Yes,” said the student, “I am.”

“Then, Babette, you may bring some bread and cheese.”

It seemed to Gebhart that he had learned all that Nicholas Flamel had to
teach him.

It was in the gray of the dawning, and the master took the pupil by the
hand and led him up the rickety stairs to the roof of the house, where
nothing was to be seen but gray sky, high roofs, and chimney stacks from
which the smoke rose straight into the still air.

“Now,” said the master, “I have taught you nearly all of the science
that I know, and the time has come to show you the wonderful thing that
has been waiting for us from the beginning when time was. You have given
up wealth and the world and pleasure and joy and love for the sake of
wisdom. Now, then, comes the last test--whether you can remain faithful
to me to the end; if you fail in it, all is lost that you have gained.”

After he said that he stripped his cloak away from his shoulders and
laid bare the skin. Then he took a bottle of red liquor and began
bathing his shoulder-blades with it; and as Gebhart, squatting upon
the ridge-pole, looked, he saw two little lumps bud out upon the smooth
skin, and then grow and grow and grow until they became two great wings
as white as snow.

“Now then,” said the master, “take me by the belt and grip fast, for
there is a long, long journey before us, and if you should lose your
head and let go your hold you will fall and be dashed to pieces.”

Then he spread the two great wings, and away he flew as fast as the
wind, with Gebhart hanging to his belt.

Over hills, over dales, over mountains, over moors he flew, with the
brown earth lying so far below that horses and cows looked like pismires
and men like fleas.

Then, by-and-by, it was over the ocean they were crossing, with the
great ships that pitched and tossed below looking like chips in a puddle
in rainy weather.

At last they came to a strange land, far, far away, and there the master
lit upon a sea-shore where the sand was as white as silver. As soon as
his feet touched the hard ground the great wings were gone like a puff
of smoke, and the wise man walked like any other body.

At the edge of the sandy beach was a great, high, naked cliff; and the
only way of reaching the top was by a flight of stone steps, as slippery
as glass, cut in the solid rock.

The wise man led the way, and the student followed close at his heels,
every now and then slipping and stumbling so that, had it not been for
the help that the master gave him, he would have fallen more than once
and have been dashed to pieces upon the rocks below.

At last they reached the top, and there found themselves in a desert,
without stick of wood or blade of grass, but only gray stones and skulls
and bones bleaching in the sun.

In the middle of the plain was a castle such as the eyes of man never
saw before, for it was built all of crystal from roof to cellar.
Around it was a high wall of steel, and in the wall were seven gates of
polished brass.

The wise man led the way straight to the middle gate of the seven, where
there hung a horn of pure silver, which he set to his lips. He blew
a blast so loud and shrill that it made Gebhart’s ears tingle. In an
instant there sounded a great rumble and grumble like the noise of
loud thunder, and the gates of brass swung slowly back, as though of
themselves.

But when Gebhart saw what he saw within the gates his heart crumbled
away for fear, and his knees knocked together; for there, in the very
middle of the way, stood a monstrous, hideous dragon, that blew out
flames and clouds of smoke from his gaping mouth like a chimney a-fire.

But the wise master was as cool as smooth water; he thrust his hand
into the bosom of his jacket and drew forth a little black box, which he
flung straight into the gaping mouth.

Snap!--the dragon swallowed the box.

The next moment it gave a great, loud, terrible cry, and, clapping and
rattling its wings, leaped into the air and flew away, bellowing like a
bull.

If Gebhart had been wonder-struck at seeing the outside of the castle,
he was ten thousand times more amazed to see the inside thereof. For,
as the master led the way and he followed, he passed through
four-and-twenty rooms, each one more wonderful than the other.
Everywhere was gold and silver and dazzling jewels that glistened so
brightly that one had to shut one’s eyes to their sparkle. Beside all
this, there were silks and satins and velvets and laces and crystal and
ebony and sandal-wood that smelled sweeter than musk and rose leaves.
All the wealth of the world brought together into one place could
not make such riches as Gebhart saw with his two eyes in these
four-and-twenty rooms. His heart beat fast within him.

At last they reached a little door of solid iron, beside which hung a
sword with a blade that shone like lightning. The master took the sword
in one hand and laid the other upon the latch of the door. Then he
turned to Gebhart and spoke for the first time since they had started
upon their long journey.

“In this room,” said he, “you will see a strange thing happen, and in a
little while I shall be as one dead. As soon as that comes to pass, go
you straightway through to the room beyond, where you will find upon a
marble table a goblet of water and a silver dagger. Touch nothing else,
and look at nothing else, for if you do all will be lost to both of us.
Bring the water straightway, and sprinkle my face with it, and when that
is done you and I will be the wisest and greatest men that ever lived,
for I will make you equal to myself in all that I know. So now swear to
do what I have just bid you, and not turn aside a hair’s breadth in the
going and the coming.

“I swear,” said Gebhart, and crossed his heart.

Then the master opened the door and entered, with Gebhart close at his
heels.

In the centre of the room was a great red cock, with eyes that shone
like sparks of fire. So soon as he saw the master he flew at him,
screaming fearfully, and spitting out darts of fire that blazed and
sparkled like lightning.

It was a dreadful battle between the master and the cock. Up and down
they fought, and here and there. Sometimes the student could see the
wise man whirling and striking with his sword; and then again he would
be hidden in a sheet of flame. But after a while he made a lucky stroke,
and off flew the cock’s head. Then, lo and behold! instead of a cock it
was a great, hairy, black demon that lay dead on the floor.

But, though the master had conquered, he looked like one sorely sick. He
was just able to stagger to a couch that stood by the wall, and there he
fell and lay, without breath or motion, like one dead, and as white as
wax.

As soon as Gebhart had gathered his wits together he remembered what the
master had said about the other room.

The door of it was also of iron. He opened it and passed within, and
there saw two great tables or blocks of polished marble. Upon one was
the dagger and a goblet of gold brimming with water. Upon the other lay
the figure of a woman, and as Gebhart looked at her he thought her more
beautiful than any thought or dream could picture. But her eyes were
closed, and she lay like a lifeless figure of wax.

After Gebhart had gazed at her a long, long time, he took up the goblet
and the dagger from the table and turned towards the door.

Then, before he left that place, he thought that he would have just one
more look at the beautiful figure. So he did, and gazed and gazed until
his heart melted away within him like a lump of butter; and, hardly
knowing what he did, he stooped and kissed the lips.

Instantly he did so a great humming sound filled the whole castle, so
sweet and musical that it made him tremble to listen. Then suddenly the
figure opened its eyes and looked straight at him.

“At last!” she said; “have you come at last?”

“Yes,” said Gebhart, “I have come.”

Then the beautiful woman arose and stepped down from the table to the
floor; and if Gebhart thought her beautiful before, he thought her a
thousand times more beautiful now that her eyes looked into his.

“Listen,” said she. “I have been asleep for hundreds upon hundreds of
years, for so it was fated to be until he should come who was to bring
me back to life again. You are he, and now you shall live with me
forever. In this castle is the wealth gathered by the king of the genii,
and it is greater than all the riches of the world. It and the castle
likewise shall be yours. I can transport everything into any part of the
world you choose, and can by my arts make you prince or king or emperor.
Come.”

“Stop,” said Gebhart. “I must first do as my master bade me.”

He led the way into the other room, the lady following him, and so they
both stood together by the couch where the wise man lay. When the lady
saw his face she cried out in a loud voice: “It is the great master!
What are you going to do?”

“I am going to sprinkle his face with this water,” said Gebhart.

“Stop!” said she. “Listen to what I have to say. In your hand you hold
the water of life and the dagger of death. The master is not dead, but
sleeping; if you sprinkle that water upon him he will awaken, young,
handsome and more powerful than the greatest magician that ever lived.
I myself, this castle, and everything that is in it will be his, and,
instead of your becoming a prince or a king or an emperor, he will be so
in your place. That, I say, will happen if he wakens. Now the dagger
of death is the only thing in the world that has power to kill him. You
have it in your hand. You have but to give him one stroke with it
while he sleeps, and he will never waken again, and then all will be
yours--your very own.”

Gebhart neither spoke nor moved, but stood looking down upon his master.
Then he set down the goblet very softly on the floor, and, shutting his
eyes that he might not see the blow, raised the dagger to strike.

“That is all your promises amount to,” said Nicholas Flamel the wise
man. “After all, Babette, you need not bring the bread and cheese, for
he shall be no pupil of mine.”

Then Gebhart opened his eyes.

There sat the wise man in the midst of his books and bottles and
diagrams and dust and chemicals and cobwebs, making strange figures upon
the table with jackstraws and a piece of chalk.

And Babette, who had just opened the cupboard door for the loaf of
bread and the cheese, shut it again with a bang, and went back to her
spinning.

So Gebhart had to go back again to his Greek and Latin and algebra and
geometry; for, after all, one cannot pour a gallon of beer into a quart
pot, or the wisdom of a Nicholas Flamel into such an one as Gebhart.

As for the name of this story, why, if some promises are not bottles
full of nothing but wind, there is little need to have a name for
anything.


“Since we are in the way of talking of fools,” said the Fisherman who
drew the Genie out of the sea--“since we are in the way of talking of
fools, I can tell you a story of the fool of all fools, and how, one
after the other, he wasted as good gifts as a man’s ears ever heard tell
of.”

“What was his name?” said the Lad who fiddled for the Jew in the
bramble-bush.

“That,” said the Fisherman, “I do not know.”

“And what is this story about?” asked St. George.

“Tis,” said the Fisherman, “about a hole in the ground.”

“And is that all?” said the Soldier who cheated the Devil.

“Nay,” said the Fisherman, blowing a whiff from his pipe; “there were
some things in the hole--a bowl of treasure, an earthen-ware jar, and a
pair of candlesticks.”

“And what do you call your story,” said St. George.

“Why,” said the Fisherman, “for lack of a better name I will call it--”




Good Gifts and a Fool’s Folly.

Give a fool heaven and earth, and all the stars, and he will make ducks
and drakes of them.

Once upon a time there was an old man, who, by thrifty living and long
saving, had laid by a fortune great enough to buy ease and comfort and
pleasure for a lifetime.

By-and-by he died, and the money came to his son, who was of a different
sort from the father; for, what that one had gained by the labor of a
whole year, the other spent in riotous living in one week.

So it came about in a little while that the young man found himself
without so much as a single penny to bless himself withal. Then his
fair-weather friends left him, and the creditors came and seized upon
his house and his household goods, and turned him out into the cold
wide world to get along as best he might with the other fools who lived
there.

Now the young spendthrift was a strong, stout fellow, and, seeing
nothing better to do, he sold his fine clothes and bought him a porter’s
basket, and went and sat in the corner of the market-place to hire
himself out to carry this or that for folk who were better off in the
world, and less foolish than he.

There he sat, all day long, from morning until evening, but nobody came
to hire him. But at last, as dusk was settling, there came along an old
man with beard as white as snow hanging down below his waist. He stopped
in front of the foolish spendthrift, and stood looking at him for a
while; then, at last, seeming to be satisfied, he beckoned with his
finger to the young man. “Come,” said he, “I have a task for you to do,
and if you are wise, and keep a still tongue in your head, I will pay
you as never a porter was paid before.”

You may depend upon it the young man needed no second bidding to such a
matter. Up he rose, and took his basket, and followed the old man, who
led the way up one street and down another, until at last they came to a
rickety, ramshackle house in a part of the town the young man had never
been before. Here the old man stopped and knocked at the door, which
was instantly opened, as though of itself, and then he entered with
the young spendthrift at his heels. The two passed through a dark
passage-way, and another door, and then, lo and behold! all was changed;
for they had come suddenly into such a place as the young man would not
have believed could be in such a house, had he not seen it with his own
eyes. Thousands of waxen tapers lit the place as bright as day--a great
oval room, floored with mosaic of a thousand bright colors and strange
figures, and hung with tapestries of silks and satins and gold and
silver. The ceiling was painted to represent the sky, through which flew
beautiful birds and winged figures so life-like that no one could tell
that they were only painted, and not real. At the farther side of the
room were two richly cushioned couches, and thither the old man led the
way with the young spendthrift following, wonder-struck, and there the
two sat themselves down. Then the old man smote his hands together, and,
in answer, ten young men and ten beautiful girls entered bearing a feast
of rare fruits and wines which they spread before them, and the young
man, who had been fasting since morning, fell to and ate as he had not
eaten for many a day.

The old man, who himself ate but little, waited patiently for the other
to end. “Now,” said he, as soon as the young man could eat no more, “you
have feasted and you have drunk; it is time for us to work.”

Thereupon he rose from the couch and led the way, the young man
following, through an arch door-way into a garden, in the centre of
which was an open space paved with white marble, and in the centre of
that again a carpet, ragged and worn, spread out upon the smooth stones.
Without saying a word, the old man seated himself upon one end of this
carpet, and motioned to the spendthrift to seat himself with his basket
at the other end; then--

“Are you ready?” said the old man.

“Yes,” said the young man, “I am.”

“Then, by the horn of Jacob,” said the old man, “I command thee, O
Carpet! to bear us over hill and valley, over lake and river, to that
spot whither I wish to go.” Hardly had the words left his mouth when
away flew the carpet, swifter than the swiftest wind, carrying the old
man and the young spendthrift, until at last it brought them to a rocky
desert without leaf or blade of grass to be seen far or near. Then it
descended to where there was a circle of sand as smooth as a floor.

The old man rolled up the carpet, and then drew from a pouch that hung
at his side a box, and from the box some sticks of sandal and spice
woods, with which he built a little fire. Next he drew from the same
pouch a brazen jar, from which he poured a gray powder upon the blaze.
Instantly there leaped up a great flame of white light and a cloud of
smoke, which rose high in the air, and there spread out until it hid
everything from sight. Then the old man began to mutter spells, and in
answer the earth shook and quaked, and a rumbling as of thunder filled
the air. At last he gave a loud cry, and instantly the earth split open,
and there the young spendthrift saw a trap-door of iron, in which was an
iron ring to lift it by.

“Look!” said the old man. “Yonder is the task for which I have brought
you; lift for me that trap-door of iron, for it is too heavy for me to
raise, and I will pay you well.”

And it was no small task, either, for, stout and strong as the young man
was, it was all he could do to lift up the iron plate. But at last up
it swung, and down below he saw a flight of stone steps leading into the
earth.

The old man drew from his bosom a copper lamp, which he lit at the fire
of the sandal and spice wood sticks, which had now nearly died away.
Then, leading the way, with the young man following close at his heels,
he descended the stairway that led down below. At the bottom the two
entered a great vaulted room, carved out of the solid stone, upon the
walls of which were painted strange pictures in bright colors of kings
and queens, genii and dragons. Excepting for these painted figures, the
vaulted room was perfectly bare, only that in the centre of the floor
there stood three stone tables. Upon the first table stood an iron
candlestick with three branches; upon the second stood an earthen jar,
empty of everything but dust; upon the third stood a brass bowl, a yard
wide and a yard deep, and filled to the brim with shining, gleaming,
dazzling jewels of all sorts.

“Now,” said the old man to the spendthrift, “I will do to you as I
promised: I will pay you as never man was paid before for such a task.
Yonder upon those three stone tables are three great treasures: choose
whichever one you will, and it is yours.”

“I shall not be long in choosing,” cried the young spendthrift. “I shall
choose the brass bowl of jewels.”

The old man laughed. “So be it,” said he. “Fill your basket from the
bowl with all you can carry, and that will be enough, provided you live
wisely, to make you rich for as long as you live.”

The young man needed no second bidding, but began filling his basket
with both hands, until he had in it as much as he could carry.

Then the old man, taking the iron candlestick and the earthen jar, led
the way up the stairway again. There the young man lowered the iron
trap-door to its place, and so soon as he had done so the other stamped
his heel upon the ground, and the earth closed of itself as smooth and
level as it had been before.

The two sat themselves upon the carpet, the one upon the one end, and
the other upon the other. “By the horn of Jacob,” said the old man,
“I command thee, O Carpet! to fly over hill and valley, over lake and
river, until thou hast brought us back whence we came.”

Away flew the carpet, and in a little time they were back in the garden
from which they had started upon their journey; and there they
parted company. “Go thy way, young man,” said the old graybeard, “and
henceforth try to live more wisely than thou hast done heretofore.
I know well who thou art, and how thou hast lived. Shun thy evil
companions, live soberly, and thou hast enough to make thee rich for as
long as thou livest.”

“Have no fear,” cried the young man, joyfully. “I have learned a bitter
lesson, and henceforth I will live wisely and well.”

So, filled with good resolves, the young man went the next day to his
creditors and paid his debts; he bought back the house which his father
had left him, and there began to lead a new life as he had promised.

But a gray goose does not become white, nor a foolish man a wise one.

At first he led a life sober enough; but by little and little he began
to take up with his old-time friends again, and by-and-by the money went
flying as merrily as ever, only this time he was twenty times richer
than he had been before, and he spent his money twenty times as fast.
Every day there was feasting and drinking going on in his house, and
roaring and rioting and dancing and singing. The wealth of a king could
not keep up such a life forever, so by the end of a year and a half the
last of the treasure was gone, and the young spendthrift was just as
poor as ever. Then once again his friends left him as they had done
before, and all that he could do was to rap his head and curse his
folly.

At last, one morning, he plucked up courage to go to the old man who had
helped him once before, to see whether he would not help him again. Rap!
tap! tap! he knocked at the door, and who should open it but the old man
himself. “Well,” said the graybeard, “what do you want?”

“I want some help,” said the spendthrift; and then he told him all, and
the old man listened and stroked his beard.

“By rights,” said he, when the young man had ended, “I should leave you
alone in your folly; for it is plain to see that nothing can cure you of
it. Nevertheless, as you helped me once, and as I have more than I shall
need, I will share what I have with you. Come in and shut the door.”

He led the way, the spendthrift following, to a little room all of bare
stone, and in which were only three things--the magic carpet, the iron
candlestick, and the earthen jar. This last the old man gave to the
foolish spendthrift. “My friend,” said he, “when you chose the money and
jewels that day in the cavern, you chose the less for the greater. Here
is a treasure that an emperor might well envy you. Whatever you wish for
you will find by dipping your hand into the jar. Now go your way, and
let what was happened cure you of your folly.”

“It shall,” cried the young man; “never again will I be so foolish as I
have been!” And thereupon he went his way with another pocketful of good
resolves.

The first thing he did when he reached home was to try the virtue of his
jar. “I should like,” said he, “to have a handful of just such treasure
as I brought from the cavern over yonder.” He dipped his hand into
the jar, and when he brought it out again it was brimful of shining,
gleaming, sparkling jewels. You can guess how he felt when he saw them.

Well, this time a whole year went by, during which the young man lived
as soberly as a judge. But at the end of the twelvemonth he was so sick
of wisdom that he loathed it as one loathes bitter drink. Then by little
and little he began to take up with his old ways again, and to call his
old cronies around, until at the end of another twelvemonth things were
a hundred times worse and wilder than ever; for now what he had he had
without end.

One day, when he and a great party of roisterers were shouting and
making merry, he brought out his earthen-ware pot to show them the
wonders of it; and to prove its virtue he gave to each guest whatever he
wanted. “What will you have?”--“A handful of gold.”--“Put your hand in
and get it!”--“What will you have?”--“A fistful of pearls.”--“Put
your fist in and get them!”--“What will you have?”--“A necklace of
diamonds.”--“Dip into the jar and get it.” And so he went from one
to another, and each and every one got what he asked for, and such a
shouting and hubbub those walls had never heard before.

Then the young man, holding the jar in his hands, began to dance and to
sing: “O wonderful jar! O beautiful jar! O beloved jar!” and so on, his
friends clapping their hands, and laughing and cheering him. At last,
in the height of his folly, he balanced the earthen jar on his head, and
began dancing around and around with it to show his dexterity.

Smash! crash! The precious jar lay in fifty pieces of the stone floor,
and the young man stood staring at the result of his folly with bulging
eyes, while his friends roared and laughed and shouted louder than ever
over his mishap. And again his treasure and his gay life were gone.

But what had been hard for him to do before was easier now. At the end
of a week he was back at the old man’s house, rapping on the door.
This time the old man asked him never a word, but frowned as black as
thunder.

“I know,” said he, “what has happened to you. If I were wise I should
let you alone in your folly; but once more I will have pity on you and
will help you, only this time it shall be the last.” Once more he led
the way to the stone room, where were the iron candlestick and the
magic carpet, and with him he took a good stout cudgel. He stood the
candlestick in the middle of the room, and taking three candles from his
pouch, thrust one into each branch. Then he struck a light, and lit the
first candle. Instantly there appeared a little old man, clad in a long
white robe, who began dancing and spinning around and around like a top.
He lit the second candle, and a second old man appeared, and round and
round he went, spinning like his brother. He lit the third candle, and
a third old man appeared. Around and around and around they spun and
whirled, until the head spun and whirled to look at them. Then the old
graybeard gripped the cudgel in his hand. “Are you ready?” he asked.

“We are ready, and waiting,” answered the three. Thereupon, without
another word, the graybeard fetched each of the dancers a blow upon the
head with might and main--One! two! three! crack! crash! jingle!

Lo and behold! Instead of the three dancing men, there lay three great
heaps of gold upon the floor, and the spendthrift stood staring like an
owl. “There,” said the old man, “take what you want, and then go your
way, and trouble me no more.”

“Well,” said the spendthrift, “of all the wonders that ever I saw,
this is the most wonderful! But how am I to carry my gold away with me,
seeing I did not fetch my basket?”

“You shall have a basket,” said the old man, “if only you will trouble
me no more. Just wait here a moment until I bring it to you.”

The spendthrift was left all alone in the room; not a soul was there
but himself. He looked up, and he looked down, and scratched his head.
“Why,” he cried aloud, “should I be content to take a part when I can
have the whole?”

To do was as easy as to say. He snatched up the iron candlestick, caught
up the staff that the old man had left leaning against the wall, and
seated himself upon the magic carpet. “By the horn of Jacob,” he cried,
“I command thee, O Carpet! to carry me over hill and valley, over lake
and river, to a place where the old man can never find me.”

Hardly had the words left his mouth than away flew the carpet through
the air, carrying him along with it; away and away, higher than the
clouds and swifter than the wind. Then at last it descended to the earth
again, and when the young spendthrift looked about him, he found himself
in just such a desert place as he and the old man had come to when
they had found the treasure. But he gave no thought to that, and hardly
looked around him to see where he was. All that he thought of was to
try his hand at the three dancers that belonged to the candlestick.
He struck a light, and lit the three candles, and instantly the three
little old men appeared for him just as they had for the old graybeard.
And around and around they spun and whirled, until the sand and dust
spun and whirled along with them. Then the young man grasped his cudgel
tightly.

Now, he had not noticed that when the old man struck the three dancers
he had held the cudgel in his left hand, for he was not wise enough
to know that great differences come from little matters. He griped the
cudgel in his right hand, and struck the dancers with might and main,
just as the old man had done. Crack! crack! crack! one; two; three.

Did they change into piles of gold? Not a bit of it! Each of the dancers
drew from under his robe a cudgel as stout and stouter than the one the
young man himself held, and, without a word, fell upon him and began to
beat and drub him until the dust flew. In vain he hopped and howled and
begged for mercy, in vain he tried to defend himself; the three never
stopped until he fell to the ground, and laid there panting and sighing
and groaning; and then they left and flew back with the iron candlestick
and the magic carpet to the old man again. At last, after a great while,
the young spendthrift sat up, rubbing the sore places; but when he
looked around not a sign was to be seen of anything but the stony
desert, without a house or a man in sight.

Perhaps, after a long time, he found his way home again, and perhaps
the drubbing he had had taught him wisdom; the first is a likely enough
thing to happen, but as for the second, it would need three strong men
to tell it to me a great many times before I would believe it.

You may smile at this story if you like, but, all the same, as certainly
as there is meat in an egg-shell, so is there truth in this nonsense.
For, “Give a fool heaven and earth,” say I, “and all the stars, and he
will make ducks and drakes of them.”


Fortunatus lifted his canican to his lips and took a long, hearty
draught of ale. “Methinks,” said he, “that all your stories have a
twang of the same sort about them. You all of you, except my friend the
Soldier here, play the same tune upon a different fiddle. Nobody comes
to any good.”

St. George drew a long whiff of his pipe, and then puffed out a cloud of
smoke as big as his head. “Perhaps,” said he to Fortunatus, “you know of
a story which turns out differently. If you do, let us have it, for it
is your turn now.”

“Very well,” said Fortunatus, “I will tell you a story that turns out as
it should, where the lad marries a beautiful princess and becomes a king
into the bargain.”

“And what is your story about?” said the Lad who fiddled for Jew in the
bramble-bush.

“It is,” said Fortunatus, “about--”




The Good of a Few Words

There was one Beppo the Wise and another Beppo the Foolish.

The wise one was the father of the foolish one.

Beppo the Wise was called Beppo the Wise because he had laid up a great
treasure after a long life of hard work.

Beppo the Foolish was called Beppo the Foolish because he spent in five
years after his father was gone from this world of sorrow all that the
old man had laid together in his long life of toil. But during that time
Beppo lived as a prince, and the life was never seen in that town before
or since--feasting and drinking and junketing and merrymaking. He had
friends by the dozen and by the scores, and the fame of his doings went
throughout all the land.

While his money lasted he was called Beppo the Generous. It was only
after it was all gone that they called him Beppo the Foolish.

So by-and-by the money was spent, and there was an end of it.

Yes; there was an end of it; and where were all of Beppo’s fair-weather
friends? Gone like the wild-geese in frosty weather.

“Don’t you remember how I gave you a bagful of gold?” says Beppo the
Foolish. “Won’t you remember me now in my time of need?”

But the fair-weather friend only laughed in his face.

“Don’t you remember how I gave you a fine gold chain with a diamond
pendant?” says Beppo to another. “And won’t you lend me a little money
to help me over to-day?”

But the summer-goose friend only grinned.

“But what shall I do to keep body and soul together?” says Beppo to a
third.

The man was a wit. “Go to a shoemaker,” said he, “and let him stitch the
soul fast;” and that was all the good Beppo had of him.

Then poor Beppo saw that there was not place for him in that town, and
so off he went to seek his fortune else whither, for he saw that there
was nothing to be gained in that place.

So he journeyed on for a week and a day, and then towards evening he
came to the king’s town.

There it stood on the hill beside the river--the grandest city in the
kingdom. There were orchards and plantations of trees along the banks
of the stream, and gardens and summer-houses and pavilions. There were
white houses and red roofs and blue skies. Up above on the hill were
olive orchards and fields, and then blue sky again.

Beppo went into the town, gazing about him with admiration. Houses,
palaces, gardens. He had never seen the like. Stores and shops full
of cloths of velvet and silk and satin; goldsmiths, silversmiths,
jewellers--as though all the riches of the world had been emptied into
the city. Crowds of people--lords, noblemen, courtiers, rich merchants,
and tradesmen.

Beppo stared about at the fine sights and everybody stared at Beppo, for
his shoes were dusty, his clothes were travel-stained, and a razor had
not touched his face for a week.

The king of that country was walking in the garden under the shade of
the trees, and the sunlight slanted down upon him, and sparkled upon the
jewels around his neck and on his fingers. Two dogs walked alongside
of him, and a whole crowd of lords and nobles and courtiers came behind
him; first of all the prime-minister with his long staff.

But for all this fine show this king was not really the king. When the
old king died he left a daughter, and she should have been queen if she
had had her own rights. But this king, who was her uncle, had stepped in
before her, and so the poor princess was pushed aside and was nobody at
all but a princess, the king’s niece.

She stood on the terrace with her old nurse, while the king walked in
the garden below.

It had been seven years now since the old king had died, and in that
time she had grown up into a beautiful young woman, as wise as she was
beautiful, and as good as she was wise. Few people ever saw her, but
everybody talked about her in whispers and praised her beauty and
goodness, saying that, if the right were done, she would have her own
and be queen.

Sometimes the king heard of this (for a king hears everything), and he
grew to hate the princess as a man hates bitter drink.

The princess looked down from the terrace, and there she saw Beppo
walking along the street, and his shoes were dusty and his clothes were
travel-stained, and a razor had not touched his face for a week.

“Look at yonder poor man,” she said to her nurse; “yet if I were his
wife he would be greater really than my uncle, the king.”

The king, walking below in the garden, heard what she said.

“Say you so!” he called out. “Then we shall try if what you say is
true;” and he turned away, shaking with anger.

“Alas!” said the princess, “now, indeed, have I ruined myself for good
and all.”

Beppo was walking along the street looking about him hither and thither,
and thinking how fine it all was. He had no more thought that the king
and the princess were talking about him than the man in the moon.

Suddenly some one clapped him upon the shoulder.

Beppo turned around.

There stood a great tall man dressed all in black.

“You must come with me,” said he.

“What do you want with me?” said Beppo.

“That you shall see for yourself,” said the man.

“Very well,” said Beppo; “I’d as lief go along with you as anywhere
else.”

So he turned and followed the man whither he led.

They went along first one street and then another, and by-and-by they
came to the river, and there was a long wall with a gate in it. The tall
man in black knocked upon the gate, and some one opened it from within.
The man in black entered, and Beppo followed at his heels, wondering
where he was going.

He was in a garden. There were fruit trees and flowering shrubs and long
marble walks, and away in the distance a great grand palace of white
marble that shone red as fire in the light of the setting sun, but there
was not a soul to be seen anywhere.

The tall man in black led the way up the long marble walk, past the
fountains and fruit trees and beds of roses, until he had come to the
palace.

Beppo wondered whether he were dreaming.

The tall man in black led the way into the palace, but still there was
not a soul to be seen.

Beppo gazed about him in wonder. There were floors of colored marble,
and ceilings of blue and gold, and columns of carved marble, and
hangings of silk and velvet and silver.

Suddenly the tall man opened a little door that led into a dark passage,
and Beppo followed him. They went along the passage, and then the man
opened another door.

Then Beppo found himself in a great vaulted room. There at one end of
the room were three souls. A man sat on the throne, and he was the
king, for he had a crown on his head and a long robe over his shoulders.
Beside him stood a priest, and in front of him stood a beautiful young
woman as white as wax and as still as death.

Beppo wondered whether he were awake.

“Come hither,” said the king, in a harsh voice, and Beppo came forward
and kneeled before him. “Take this young woman by the hand,” said the
king.

Beppo did as he was bidden.

Her hand was as cold as ice.

Then, before Beppo knew what was happening, he found that he was being
married.

It was the princess.

“Now,” said the king to her when the priest had ended, and he frowned
until his brows were as black as thunder--“now you are married; tell me,
is your husband greater than I?”

But the princess said never a word, only the tears ran one after another
down her white face. The king sat staring at her and frowning.

Suddenly some one tapped Beppo upon the shoulder. It was the tall man in
black.

Beppo knew that he was to follow him again. This time the princess
was to go along. The tall man in black led the way, and Beppo and the
princess followed along the secret passage and up and down the stairs
until at last they came out into the garden again.

And now the evening was beginning to fall.

The man led the way down the garden to the river, and still Beppo and
the princess followed him.

By-and-by they came to the river-side and to a flight of steps, and
there was a little frail boat without sail or oars.

The tall man in black beckoned towards the boat, and Beppo knew that he
and princess were to enter it.

As soon as Beppo had helped the princess into the boat the tall man
thrust it out into the stream with his foot, and the boat drifted away
from the shore and out into the river, and then around and around. Then
it floated off down the stream.

It floated on and on, and the sun set and the moon rose.

Beppo looked at the princess, and he thought he had never seen any one
so beautiful in all his life. It was all like a dream, and he hoped he
might never waken. But the princess sat there weeping and weeping, and
said nothing.

The night fell darker and darker, but still Beppo sat looking at the
princess. Her face was as white as silver in the moonlight. The smell
of the flower-gardens came across the river. The boat floated on and on
until by-and-by it drifted to the shore again and among the river reeds,
and there it stopped, and Beppo carried the princess ashore.

“Listen,” said the princess. “Do you know who I am?”

“No,” said Beppo, “I do not.”

“I am the princess,” said she, “the king’s niece; and by rights I should
be queen of this land.”

Beppo could not believe his ears.

“It is true that I am married to you,” said she, “but never shall you be
my husband until you are king.”

“King!” said Beppo; “how can I be king?”

“You shall be king,” said the princess.

“But the king is everything,” said Beppo, “and I am nothing at all.”

“Great things come from small beginnings,” said the princess; “a big
tree from a little seed.”

Some little distance away from the river was the twinkle of a light, and
thither Beppo led the princess. When the two came to it, they found
it was a little hut, for there were fish-nets hanging outside in the
moonlight.

Beppo knocked.

An old woman opened the door. She stared and stared, as well she might,
to see the fine lady in silks and satins with a gold ring upon her
finger, and nobody with her but one who looked like a poor beggar-man.

“Who are you and what do you want?” said the old woman.

“Who we are,” said the princess, “does not matter, except that we are
honest folk in trouble. What we want is shelter for the night and food
to eat, and that we will pay for.”

“Shelter I can give you,” said the old woman, “but little else but a
crust of bread and a cup of water. One time there was enough and plenty
in the house; but now, since my husband has gone and I am left all
alone, it is little I have to eat and drink. But such as I have to give
you are welcome to.”

Then Beppo and the princess went into the house.

The next morning the princess called Beppo to her. “Here,” said she, “is
a ring and a letter. Go you into the town and inquire for Sebastian the
Goldsmith. He will know what to do.”

Beppo took the ring and the letter and started off to town, and it
was not hard for him to find the man he sought, for every one knew of
Sebastian the Goldsmith. He was an old man, with a great white beard and
a forehead like the dome of a temple. He looked at Beppo from head to
foot with eyes as bright as those of a snake; then he took the ring
and the letter. As soon as he saw the ring he raised it to his lips and
kissed it; then he kissed the letter also; then he opened it and read
it.

He turned to Beppo and bowed very low. “My lord,” said he, “I will do as
I am commanded. Will you be pleased to follow me?”

He led the way into an inner room. There were soft rugs upon the floor,
and around the walls were tapestries. There were couches and silken
cushions. Beppo wondered what it all meant.

Sebastian the Goldsmith clapped his hands together. A door opened, and
there came three black slaves into the room. The Goldsmith spoke to them
in a strange language, and the chief of the three black slaves bowed in
reply. Then he and the others led Beppo into another room where there
was a marble bath of tepid water. They bathed him and rubbed him with
soft linen towels; then they shaved the beard from his cheeks and chin
and trimmed his hair; then they clothed him in fine linen and a plain
suit of gray and Beppo looked like a new man.

Then when all this was done the chief of the blacks conducted Beppo back
to Sebastian the Goldsmith. There was a fine feast spread, with fruit
and wine. Beppo sat down to it, and Sebastian the Goldsmith stood and
served him with a napkin over his arm.

Then Beppo was to return to the princess again.

A milk-white horse was waiting for him at the Goldsmith’s door, a
servant holding the bridle, and Beppo mounted and rode away.

When he returned to the fisherman’s hut the princess was waiting for
him. She had prepared a tray spread with a napkin, a cup of milk, and
some sweet cakes.

“Listen,” said she; “to-day the king hunts in the forest over yonder. Go
you thither with this. The king will be hot and thirsty, and weary with
the chase. Offer him this refreshment. He will eat and drink, and in
gratitude he will offer you something in return. Take nothing of him,
but ask him this: that he allow you once every three days to come to the
palace, and that he whisper these words in your ear so that no one else
may hear them--‘A word, a word, only a few words; spoken ill, they are
ill; spoken well, they are more precious than gold and jewels.’”

“Why should I do that?” said Beppo.

“You will see,” said the princess.

Beppo did not understand it at all, but the princess is a princess and
must be obeyed, and so he rode away on his horse at her bidding.

It was as the princess had said: the king was hunting in the forest,
and when Beppo came there he could hear the shouts of the men and the
winding of horns and the baying of dogs. He waited there for maybe an
hour or more, and sometimes the sounds were nearer and sometimes the
sounds were farther away. Presently they came nearer and nearer, and
then all of a sudden the king came riding out of the forest, the hounds
hunting hither and thither, and the lords and nobles and courtiers
following him.

The king’s face was flushed and heated with the chase, and his forehead
was bedewed with sweat. Beppo came forward and offered the tray. The
king wiped his face with the napkin, and then drank the milk and ate
three of the cakes.

“Who was it ordered you to bring this to me?” said he to Beppo.

“No one,” said Beppo; “I brought it myself.”

The king looked at Beppo and was grateful to him.

“Thou hast given me pleasure and comfort,” said he; “ask what thou wilt
in return and if it is in reason thou shalt have it.”

“I will have only this,” said Beppo: “that your majesty will allow me
once every three days to come to the palace, and that then you will take
me aside and will whisper these words into my ear so that no one else
may hear them--A word, a word, only a few words; spoken ill, they are
ill; spoken well, they are more precious than gold and jewels.’”

The king burst out laughing. “Why,” said he, “what is this foolish thing
you ask of me? If you had asked for a hundred pieces of gold you should
have had them. Think better, friend, and ask something of more worth
than this foolish thing.”

“Please your majesty,” said Beppo, “I ask nothing else.”

The king laughed again. “Then you shall have what you ask,” said he, and
he rode away.

The next morning the princess said to Beppo: “This day you shall go and
claim the king’s promise of him. Take this ring and this letter again to
Sebastian the Goldsmith. He will fit you with clothes in which to appear
before the king. Then go to the king’s palace that he may whisper those
words he has to say into your ear.”

Once more Beppo went to Sebastian the Goldsmith, and the Goldsmith
kissed the princess’s ring and letter, and read what she had written.

Again the black slaves took Beppo to the bath, only this time they clad
him in a fine suit of velvet and hung a gold chain around his neck.
After that Sebastian the Goldsmith again served a feast to Beppo, and
waited upon him while he ate and drank.

In front of the house a noble horse, as black as jet, was waiting to
carry Beppo to the palace, and two servants dressed in velvet livery
were waiting to attend him.

So Beppo rode away, and many people stopped to look at him.

He came to the palace, and the king was giving audience. Beppo went into
the great audience-chamber. It was full of people--lords and nobles and
rich merchants and lawyers.

Beppo did not know how to come to the king, so he stood there and waited
and waited. The people looked at him and whispered to one another: “Who
is that young man?” “Whence comes he?” Then one said: “Is not he
the young man who served the king with cakes and milk in the forest
yesterday?”

Beppo stood there gazing at the king. By-and-by the king suddenly looked
up and caught sight of him. He gazed at Beppo for a moment or two and
then he knew him. Then he smiled and beckoned to him.

“Aye, my foolish benefactor,” said he, aloud, “is it thou, and art
thou come so soon to redeem thy promise? Very well; come hither, I have
something to say to thee.”

Beppo came forward, and everybody stared. He came close to the king, and
the king laid his hand upon his shoulder. Then he leaned over to Beppo
and whispered in his ear: “A word, a word, only a few words; if they be
spoken ill, they are ill; if they be spoken well, they are more precious
than gold and jewels.” Then he laughed. “Is that what you would have me
say?” said he.

“Yes, majesty,” said Beppo, and he bowed low and withdrew.

But, lo and behold, what a change!

Suddenly he was transformed in the eyes of the whole world. The crowd
drew back to allow him to pass, and everybody bowed low as he went
along.

“Did you not see the king whisper to him,” said one. “What could it be
that the king said?” said another. “This must be a new favorite,” said a
third.

He had come into the palace Beppo the Foolish; he went forth Beppo the
Great Man, and all because of a few words the king had whispered in his
ear.

Three days passed, and then Beppo went again to the Goldsmith’s with the
ring and a letter from the princess. This time Sebastian the Goldsmith
fitted him with a suit of splendid plum-colored silk and gave him a
dappled horse, and again Beppo and his two attendants rode away to the
palace. And this time every one knew him, and as he went up the steps
into the palace all present bowed to him. The king saw him as soon as he
appeared, and when he caught sight of him he burst out laughing.

“Aye,” said he, “I was looking for thee today, and wondering how soon
thou wouldst come. Come hither till I whisper something in thine ear.”

Then all the lords and nobles and courtiers and ministers drew back, and
Beppo went up to the king.

The king laughed and laughed. He laid his arm over Beppo’s shoulder,
and again he whispered in his ear: “A word, a word, only a few words; if
they be spoken ill, they are ill; if they be spoken well, they are more
precious than gold and jewels.”

Then he released Beppo, and Beppo withdrew.

So it continued for three months. Every three days Beppo went to the
palace, and the king whispered the words in his ear. Beppo said nothing
to any one, and always went away as soon as the king had whispered to
him.

Then at last the princess said to him: “Now the time is ripe for doing.
Listen! To-day when you go to the palace fix your eyes, when the
king speaks to you, upon the prime-minister, and shake your head. The
prime-minister will ask you what the king said. Say nothing to him but
this: Alas, my poor friend!’”

It was all just as the princess had said.

The king was walking in the garden, with his courtiers and ministers
about him. Beppo came to him, and the king, as he always did, laid his
hand upon Beppo’s shoulder and whispered in his ear: “A word, a word,
only a few words; if they be spoken ill, they are ill; if they be spoken
well, they are more precious than gold and jewels.”

While the king was saying these words to Beppo, Beppo was looking
fixedly at the prime-minister. While he did so he shook his head three
times. Then he bowed low and walked away.

He had not gone twenty paces before some one tapped him upon the arm;
it was the prime-minister. Beppo gazed fixedly at him. “Alas, my poor
friend!” said he.

The prime-minister turned pale. “It was, then, as I thought,” said he.
“The king spoke about me. Will you not tell me what he said?”

Beppo shook his head. “Alas, my poor friend!” said he, and then he
walked on.

The prime-minister still followed him.

“My lord,” said he, “I have been aware that his majesty has not been the
same to me for more than a week past. If it was about the princess, pray
tell his majesty that I meant nothing ill when I spoke of her to him.”

Beppo shook his head. “Alas, my poor friend!” he said.

The prime-minister’s lips trembled. “My lord,” said he, “I have always
had the kindest regard for you, and if there is anything in my power
that I can do for you I hope you will command me. I know how much you
are in his majesty’s confidence. Will you not speak a few words to set
the matter straight?”

Beppo again shook his head. “Alas, my poor friend!” said he, and then he
got upon his horse and rode away.

Three days passed.

“This morning,” said the princess, “when you go to the king, look at
the prime-minister when the king speaks to you, and smile. The
prime-minister will again speak to you, and this time say, It is well,
and I wish you joy.’ Take what he gives you, for it will be of use.”

Again all happened just as the princess said.

Beppo came to the palace, and again the king whispered in his ear. As
he did so Beppo looked at the prime-minister and smiled, and then he
withdrew.

The prime-minister followed him. He trembled. “It is well,” said Beppo,
“and I wish you joy.”

The prime-minister grasped his hand and wrung it. “My lord,” said he,
“how can I express my gratitude! The palace of my son that stands by the
river--I would that you would use it for your own, if I may be so bold
as to offer it to you.”

“I will,” said Beppo, “use it as my own.”

The prime-minister wrung his hand again, and then Beppo rode away.

The next time that Beppo spoke to the king, at the princess’s bidding,
he looked at the lord-treasurer, and said, as he had said to the
prime-minister, “Alas, my poor friend!”

When he rode away he left the lord-treasurer as white as ashes to the
very lips.

Three days passed, and then, while the king talked to Beppo, Beppo
looked at the lord-treasurer and smiled.

The lord-treasurer followed him to the door of the palace.

“It is well, and I wish you joy,” said Beppo.

The treasurer offered him a fortune.

The next time it was the same with the captain of the guards. First
Beppo pitied him, and then he wished him joy.

“My lord,” said the captain of the guards, “my services are yours at any
time.”

Then the same thing happened to the governor of the city, then to this
lord, and then to that lord.

Beppo grew rich and powerful beyond measure.

Then one day the princess said: “Now we will go into the town, and to
the palace of the prime-minister’s son, which the prime-minister gave
you, for the time is ripe for the end.”

In a few days all the court knew that Beppo was living like a prince in
the prime-minister’s palace. The king began to wonder what it all meant,
and how all such good-fortune had come to Beppo. He had grown very tired
of always speaking to Beppo the same words.

But Beppo was now great among the great; all the world paid court to
him, and bowed down to him, almost as they did before the king.

“Now,” said the princess, “the time has come to strike. Bid all the
councillors, and all the lords, and all the nobles to meet here three
days hence, for it is now or never that you shall win all and become
king.”

Beppo did as she bade. He asked all of the great people of the kingdom
to come to him, and they came. When they were all gathered together at
Beppo’s house, they found two thrones set as though for a king and a
queen, but there was no sign of Beppo, and everybody wondered what it
all meant.

Suddenly the door opened and Beppo came into the room, leading by the
hand a lady covered with a veil from head to foot.

Everybody stopped speaking and stood staring while Beppo led the veiled
lady up to one of the thrones. He seated himself upon the other.

The lady stood up and dropped her veil, and then every one knew her.

It was the princess. “Do you not know me?” said she; “I am the queen,
and this is my husband. He is your king.”

All stood silent for a moment, and then a great shout went up. “Long
live the queen! Long live the king!”

The princess turned to the captain of the guards. “You have offered your
services to my husband,” said she; “his commands and my commands are
that you march to the palace and cast out him who hath no right there.”

“It shall be done,” said the captain of the guards.

All the troops were up in arms, and the town was full of tumult and
confusion. About midnight they brought the false king before King Beppo
and the queen. The false king stood there trembling like a leaf. The
queen stood gazing at him steadily. “Behold, this is the husband that
thou gavest me,” said she. “It is as I said; he is greater than thou.
For, lo, he is king! What art thou?”

The false king was banished out of the country, and the poor fisherman’s
wife, who had entertained the princess for all this time, came to live
at the palace, where all was joy and happiness.


“Friend,” said St. George, “I like your story. Ne’th’less, tis like a
strolling peddler, in that it carries a great deal of ills to begin
with, to get rid of them all before it gets to the end of its journey.
However, tis as you say--it ends with everybody merry and feasting, and
so I like it. But now methinks our little friend yonder is big with a
story of his own;” and he pointed, as he spoke, with the stem of his
pipe to a little man whom I knew was the brave Tailor who had killed
seven flies at a blow, for he still had around his waist the belt with
the legend that he himself had worked upon it.

“Aye,” piped the Tailor in a keen, high voice, “tis true I have a story
inside of me. Tis about another tailor who had a great, big, black, ugly
demon to wait upon him and to sew his clothes for him.”

“And the name of that story, my friend,” said the Soldier who had
cheated the Devil, “is what?”

“It hath no name,” piped the little Tailor, “but I will give it one, and
it shall be--”




Woman’s Wit.

When man’s strength fails, woman’s wit prevails.

In the days when the great and wise King Solomon lived and ruled, evil
spirits and demons were as plentiful in the world as wasps in summer.

So King Solomon, who was so wise and knew so many potent spells that he
had power over evil such as no man has had before or since, set himself
to work to put those enemies of mankind out of the way. Some he conjured
into bottles, and sank into the depths of the sea; some he buried in
the earth; some he destroyed altogether, as one burns hair in a
candle-flame.

Now, one pleasant day when King Solomon was walking in his garden with
his hands behind his back, and his thoughts busy as bees with this or
that, he came face to face with a Demon, who was a prince of his kind.
“Ho, little man!” cried the evil spirit, in a loud voice, “art not thou
the wise King Solomon who conjures my brethren into brass chests and
glass bottles? Come, try a fall at wrestling with me, and whoever
conquers shall be master over the other for all time. What do you say to
such an offer as that?”

“I say aye!” said King Solomon, and, without another word, he stripped
off his royal robes and stood bare breasted, man to man with the other.

The world never saw the like of that wrestling match betwixt the king
and the Demon, for they struggled and strove together from the seventh
hour in the morning to the sunset in the evening, and during that time
the sky was clouded over as black as night, and the lightning forked
and shot, and the thunder roared and bellowed, and the earth shook and
quaked.

But at last the king gave the enemy an under twist, and flung him down
on the earth so hard that the apples fell from the trees; and then,
panting and straining, he held the evil one down, knee on neck.
Thereupon the sky presently cleared again, and all was as pleasant as a
spring day.

King Solomon bound the Demon with spells, and made him serve him for
seven years. First, he had him build a splendid palace, the like of
which was not to be seen within the bounds of the seven rivers; then he
made him set around the palace a garden, such as I for one wish I may
see some time or other. Then, when the Demon had done all that the king
wished, the king conjured him into a bottle, corked it tightly, and set
the royal seal on the stopper. Then he took the bottle a thousand miles
away into the wilderness, and, when no man was looking, buried it in the
ground, and this is the way the story begins.

Well, the years came and the years went, and the world grew older and
older, and kept changing (as all things do but two), so that by-and-by
the wilderness where King Solomon had hid the bottle became a great
town, with people coming and going, and all as busy as bees about their
own business and other folks’ affairs.

Among these towns-people was a little Tailor, who made clothes for many
a worse man to wear, and who lived all alone in a little house with no
one to darn his stockings for him, and no one to meddle with his coming
and going, for he was a bachelor.

The little Tailor was a thrifty soul, and by hook and crook had laid by
enough money to fill a small pot, and then he had to bethink himself of
some safe place to hide it. So one night he took a spade and a lamp and
went out in the garden to bury his money. He drove his spade into the
ground--and click! He struck something hard that rang under his foot
with a sound as of iron. “Hello!” said he, “what have we here?” and if
he had known as much as you and I do, he would have filled in the earth,
and tramped it down, and have left that plate of broth for somebody else
to burn his mouth with.

As it was, he scraped away the soil, and then he found a box of adamant,
with a ring in the lid to lift it by. The Tailor clutched the ring and
bent his back, and up came the box with the damp earth sticking to it.
He cleaned the mould away, and there he saw, written in red letters,
these words:

“Open not.”

You may be sure that after he had read these words he was not long in
breaking open the lid of the box with his spade.

Inside the first box he found a second, and upon it the same words:

“Open not.”

Within the second box was another, and within that still another, until
there were seven in all, and on each was written the same words:

“Open not.”

Inside the seventh box was a roll of linen, and inside that a bottle
filled with nothing but blue smoke; and I wish that bottle had burned
the Tailor’s fingers when he touched it.

“And is this all?” said the little Tailor, turning the bottle upside
down and shaking it, and peeping at it by the light of the lamp. “Well,
since I have gone so far I might as well open it, as I have already
opened the seven boxes.” Thereupon he broke the seal that stoppered it.

Pop! out flew the cork, and--puff! out came the smoke; not all at once,
but in a long thread that rose up as high as the stars, and then spread
until it hid their light.

The Tailor stared and goggled and gaped to see so much smoke come out of
such a little bottle, and, as he goggled and stared, the smoke began to
gather together again, thicker and thicker, and darker and darker, until
it was as black as ink. Then out from it there stepped one with eyes
that shone like sparks of fire, and who had a countenance so terrible
that the Tailor’s skin quivered and shrivelled, and his tongue clove to
the roof of his mouth at the sight of it.

“Who are thou?” said the terrible being, in a voice that made the very
marrow of the poor Tailor’s bones turn soft from terror.

“If you please, sir,” said he, “I am only a little tailor.”

The evil being lifted up both hands and eyes. “How wonderful,” he cried,
“that one little tailor can undo in a moment that which took the wise
Solomon a whole day to accomplish, and in the doing of which he wellnigh
broke the sinews of his heart!” Then, turning to the Tailor, who stood
trembling like a rabbit, “Hark thee!” said he. “For two thousand years
I lay there in that bottle, and no one came nigh to aid me. Thou hast
liberated me, and thou shalt not go unrewarded. Every morning at the
seventh hour I will come to thee, and I will perform for thee whatever
task thou mayst command me. But there is one condition attached to
the agreement, and woe be to thee if that condition is broken. If any
morning I should come to thee, and thou hast no task for me to do, I
shall wring thy neck as thou mightest wring the neck of a sparrow.”
 Thereupon he was gone in an instant, leaving the little Tailor half dead
with terror.

Now it happened that the prime-minister of that country had left an
order with the Tailor for a suit of clothes, so the next morning, when
the Demon came, the little man set him to work on the bench, with his
legs tucked up like a journey-man tailor. “I want,” said he, “such and
such a suit of clothes.”

“You shall have them,” said the Demon; and thereupon he began snipping
in the air, and cutting most wonderful patterns of silks and satins out
of nothing at all, and the little Tailor sat and gaped and stared. Then
the Demon began to drive the needle like a spark of fire--the like was
never seen in all the seven kingdoms, for the clothes seemed to make
themselves.

At last, at the end of a little while, the Demon stood up and brushed
his hands. “They are done,” said he, and thereupon he instantly
vanished. But the Tailor cared little for that, for upon the bench there
lay such a suit of clothes of silk and satin stuff, sewed with threads
of gold and silver and set with jewels, as the eyes of man never saw
before; and the Tailor packed them up and marched off with them himself
to the prime-minister.

The prime-minister wore the clothes to court that very day, and before
evening they were the talk of the town. All the world ran to the Tailor
and ordered clothes of him, and his fortune was made. Every day the
Demon created new suits of clothes out of nothing at all, so that the
Tailor grew as rich as a Jew, and held his head up in the world.

As time went along he laid heavier and heavier tasks upon the Demon’s
back, and demanded of him more and more; but all the while the Demon
kept his own counsel, and said never a word.

One morning, as the Tailor sat in his shop window taking the world
easy--for he had little or nothing to do now--he heard a great hubbub in
the street below, and when he looked down he saw that it was the king’s
daughter passing by. It was the first time that the Tailor had seen her,
and when he saw her his heart stood still within him, and then began
fluttering like a little bird, for one so beautiful was not to be met
with in the four corners of the world. Then she was gone.

All that day the little Tailor could do nothing but sit and think of the
princess, and the next morning when the Demon came he was thinking of
her still.

“What hast thou for me to do to-day?” said the Demon, as he always said
of a morning.

The little Tailor was waiting for the question.

“I would like you,” said he, “to send to the king’s palace, and to ask
him to let me have his daughter for my wife.”

“Thou shalt have thy desire,” said the Demon. Thereupon he smote his
hands together like a clap of thunder, and instantly the walls of the
room clove asunder, and there came out four-and-twenty handsome youths,
clad in cloth of gold and silver. After these four-and-twenty there came
another one who was the chief of them all, and before whom, splendid as
they were, the four-and-twenty paled like stars in daylight. “Go to the
king’s palace,” said the Demon to that one, “and deliver this message:
The Tailor of Tailors, the Master of Masters, and One Greater than a
King asks for his daughter to wife.”

“To hear is to obey,” said the other, and bowed his forehead to the
earth.

Never was there such a hubbub in the town as when those five-and-twenty,
in their clothes of silver and gold, rode through the streets to the
king’s palace. As they came near, the gates of the palace flew open
before them, and the king himself came out to meet them. The leader
of the five-and-twenty leaped from his horse, and, kissing the ground
before the king, delivered his message: “The Tailor of Tailors, the
Master of Masters, and One Greater than a King asks for thy daughter to
wife.”

When the king heard what the messenger said, he thought and pondered
a long time. At last he said, “If he who sent you is the Master of
Masters, and greater than a king, let him send me an asking gift such as
no king could send.”

“It shall be as you desire,” said the messenger, and thereupon the
five-and-twenty rode away as they had come, followed by crowds of
people.

The next morning when the Demon came the tailor was ready and waiting
for him. “What hast thou for me to do to-day?” said the Evil One.

“I want,” said the tailor, “a gift to send to the king such as no other
king could send him.”

“Thou shalt have thy desire,” said the Demon. Thereupon he smote his
hands together, and summoned, not five-and-twenty young men, but fifty
youths, all clad in clothes more splendid than the others.

All of the fifty sat upon coal-black horses, with saddles of silver and
housings of silk and velvet embroidered with gold. In the midst of all
the five-and-seventy there rode a youth in cloth of silver embroidered
in pearls. In his hand he bore something wrapped in a white napkin, and
that was the present for the king such as no other king could give. So
said the Demon: “Take it to the royal palace, and tell his majesty that
it is from the Tailor of Tailors, the Master of Masters, and One Greater
than a King.”

“To hear is to obey,” said the young man, and then they all rode away.

When they came to the palace the gates flew open before them, and
the king came out to meet them. The young man who bore the present
dismounted and prostrated himself in the dust, and, when the king bade
him arise, he unwrapped the napkin, and gave to the king a goblet
made of one single ruby, and filled to the brim with pieces of gold.
Moreover, the cup was of such a kind that whenever it was emptied of its
money it instantly became full again. “The Tailor of Tailors, the Master
of Masters, and One Greater than a King sends your majesty this goblet,
and bids me, his ambassador, to ask for your daughter,” said the young
man.

When the king saw what had been sent him he was filled with amazement.
“Surely,” said he to himself, “there can be no end to the power of one
who can give such a gift as this.” Then to the messenger, “Tell your
master that he shall have my daughter for his wife if he will build
over yonder a palace such as no man ever saw or no king ever lived in
before.”

“It shall be done,” said the young man, and then they all went away, as
the others had done the day before.

The next morning when the Demon appeared the Tailor was ready for him.
“Build me,” said he, “such and such a palace in such and such a place.”

And the Demon said, “It shall be done.” He smote his hands together, and
instantly there came a cloud of mist that covered and hid the spot where
the palace was to be built. Out from the cloud there came such a banging
and hammering and clapping and clattering as the people of that town
never heard before. Then when evening had come the cloud arose, and
there, where the king had pointed out, stood a splendid palace as white
as snow, with roofs and domes of gold and silver. As the king stood
looking and wondering at this sight, there came five hundred young men
riding, and one in the midst of all who wore a golden crown on his head,
and upon his body a long robe stiff with diamonds and pearls. “We come,”
 said he, “from the Tailor of Tailors, and Master of Masters, and One
Greater than a King, to ask you to let him have your daughter for his
wife.”

“Tell him to come!” cried the king, in admiration, “for the princess is
his.”

The next morning when the Demon came he found the Tailor dancing and
shouting for joy. “The princess is mine!” he cried, “so make me ready
for her.”

“It shall be done,” said the Demon, and thereupon he began to make the
Tailor ready for his wedding. He brought him to a marble bath of water,
in which he washed away all that was coarse and ugly, and from which the
little man came forth as beautiful as the sun. Then the Demon clad
him in the finest linen, and covered him with clothes such as even the
emperor of India never wore. Then he smote his hands together, and the
wall of the tailor-shop opened as it had done twice before, and there
came forth forty slaves clad in crimson, and bearing bowls full of money
in their hands. After them came two leading a horse as white as snow,
with a saddle of gold studded with diamonds and rubies and emeralds
and sapphires. After came a body-guard of twenty warriors clad in gold
armor. Then the Tailor mounted his horse and rode away to the king’s
palace, and as he rode the slaves scattered the money amongst the crowd,
who scrambled for it and cheered the Tailor to the skies.

That night the princess and the Tailor were married, and all the town
was lit with bonfires and fireworks. The two rode away in the midst of
a great crowd of nobles and courtiers to the palace which the Demon had
built for the Tailor; and, as the princess gazed upon him, she thought
that she had never beheld so noble and handsome a man as her husband. So
she and the Tailor were the happiest couple in the world.

But the next morning the Demon appeared as he had appeared ever since
the Tailor had let him out of the bottle, only now he grinned till his
teeth shone and his face turned black. “What hast thou for me to do?”
 said he, and at the words the Tailor’s heart began to quake, for he
remembered what was to happen to him when he could find the Demon no
more work to do--that his neck was to be wrung--and now he began to see
that he had all that he could ask for in the world. Yes; what was there
to ask for now?

“I have nothing more for you to do,” said he to the Demon; “you have
done all that man could ask--you may go now.”

“Go!” cried the Demon, “I shall not go until I have done all that I have
to do. Give me work, or I shall wring your neck.” And his fingers began
to twitch.

Then the Tailor began to see into what a net he had fallen. He began to
tremble like one in an ague. He turned his eyes up and down, for he
did not know where to look for aid. Suddenly, as he looked out of the
window, a thought struck him. “Maybe,” thought he, “I can give the Demon
such a task that even he cannot do it. Yes, yes!” he cried, “I have
thought of something for you to do. Make me out yonder in front of my
palace a lake of water a mile long and a mile wide, and let it be
lined throughout with white marble, and filled with water as clear as
crystal.”

“It shall be done,” said the Demon. As he spoke he spat in the air,
and instantly a thick fog arose from the earth and hid everything from
sight. Then presently from the midst of the fog there came a great
noise of chipping and hammering, of digging and delving, of rushing and
gurgling. All day the noise and the fog continued, and then at sunset
the one ceased and the other cleared away. The poor Tailor looked out
the window, and when he saw what he saw his teeth chattered in his head,
for there was a lake a mile long and a mile broad, lined within with
white marble, and filled with water as clear as crystal, and he knew
that the Demon would come the next morning for another task to do.

That night he slept little or none, and when the seventh hour of the
morning came the castle began to rock and tremble, and there stood the
Demon, and his hair bristled and his eyes shone like sparks of fire.
“What hast thou for me to do?” said he, and the poor Tailor could do
nothing but look at him with a face as white as dough.

“What hast thou for me to do?” said the Demon again, and then at last
the Tailor found his wits and his tongue from sheer terror. “Look!” said
he, “at the great mountain over yonder; remove it, and make in its place
a level plain with fields and orchards and gardens.” And he thought to
himself when he had spoken, “Surely, even the Demon cannot do that.”

“It shall be done,” said the Demon, and, so saying, he stamped his heel
upon the ground. Instantly the earth began to tremble and quake, and
there came a great rumbling like the sound of thunder. A cloud of
darkness gathered in the sky, until at last all was as black as the
blackest midnight. Then came a roaring and a cracking and a crashing,
such as man never heard before. All day it continued, until the time
of the setting of the sun, when suddenly the uproar ceased, and the
darkness cleared away; and when the Tailor looked out of the window
the mountain was gone, and in its place were fields and orchards and
gardens.

It was very beautiful to see, but when the Tailor beheld it his knees
began to smite together, and the sweat ran down his face in streams. All
that night he walked up and down and up and down, but he could not think
of one other task for the Demon to do.

When the next morning came the Demon appeared like a whirlwind. His
face was as black as ink and smoke, and sparks of fire flew from his
nostrils.

“What have you for me to do?” cried he.

“I have nothing for you to do!” piped the poor Tailor.

“Nothing?” cried the Demon.

“Nothing.”

“Then prepare to die.”

“Stop!” cried the Tailor, falling on his knees, “let me first see my
wife.”

“So be it,” said the Demon, and if he had been wiser he would have said
“No.”

When the Tailor came to the princess, he flung himself on his face, and
began to weep and wail. The princess asked him what was the matter, and
at last, by dint of question, got the story from him, piece by piece.
When she had it all she began laughing. “Why did you not come to me
before?” said she, “instead of making all this trouble and uproar for
nothing at all? I will give the Monster a task to do.” She plucked a
single curling hair from her head. “Here,” said she, “let him take this
hair and make it straight.”

The Tailor was full of doubt; nevertheless, as there was nothing better
to do, he took it to the Demon.

“Hast thou found me a task to do?” cried the Demon.

“Yes,” said the Tailor. “It is only a little thing. Here is a hair from
my wife’s head; take it and make it straight.”

When the Demon heard what was the task that the Tailor had set him to do
he laughed aloud; but that was because he did not know. He took the
hair and stroked it between his thumb and finger, and, when he done, it
curled more than ever. Then he looked serious, and slapped it between
his palms, and that did not better matters, for it curled as much as
ever. Then he frowned, and, began beating the hair with his palm upon
his knees, and that only made it worse. All that day he labored and
strove at his task trying to make that one little hair straight, and,
when the sun set, there was the hair just as crooked as ever. Then, as
the great round sun sank red behind the trees, the Demon knew that he
was beaten. “I am conquered! I am conquered!” he howled, and flew away,
bellowing so dreadfully that all the world trembled.

So ends the story, with only this to say:

Where man’s strength fails, woman’s wit prevails.

For, to my mind, the princess--not to speak of her husband the little
Tailor--did more with a single little hair and her mother wit than King
Solomon with all his wisdom.


“Whose turn is it next to tell us a story?” said Sindbad the Sailor.

“Twas my turn,” said St. George; “but here be two ladies present, and
neither hath so much as spoken a word of a story for all this time. If
you, madam,” said he to Cinderella, “will tell us a tale, I will gladly
give up my turn to you.”

The Soldier who cheated the Devil took the pipe out of his mouth and
puffed away a cloud of smoke. “Aye,” said he, “always remember the
ladies, say I. That is a soldier’s trade.”

“Very well, then; if it is your pleasure,” said Cinderella. “I will tell
you a story, and it shall be of a friend of mine and of how she looked
after her husband’s luck. She was,” said Cinderella, “a princess, and
her father was a king.”

“And what is your story about?” said Sindbad the Sailor.

“It is,” said Cinderella, “about--”




A Piece of Good Luck

There were three students who were learning all that they could. The
first was named Joseph, the second was named John, and the third was
named Jacob Stuck. They studied seven long years under a wise master,
and in that time they learned all that their master had to teach them
of the wonderful things he knew. They learned all about geometry,
they learned all about algebra, they learned all about astronomy, they
learned all about the hidden arts, they learned all about everything,
except how to mend their own hose and where to get cabbage to boil in
the pot.

And now they were to go out into the world to practice what they knew.
The master called the three students to him--the one named Joseph, the
second named John, and the third named Jacob Stuck--and said he to them,
said he: “You have studied faithfully and have learned all that I have
been able to teach you, and now you shall not go out into the world with
nothing at all. See; here are three glass balls, and that is one for
each of you. Their like is not to be found in the four corners of the
world. Carry the balls wherever you go, and when one of them drops to
the ground, dig, and there you will certainly find a treasure.”

So the three students went out into the wide world.

Well, they travelled on and on for day after day, each carrying his
glass ball with him wherever he went. They travelled on and on for I
cannot tell how long, until one day the ball that Joseph carried slipped
out of his fingers and fell to the ground. “I’ve found a treasure!”
 cried Joseph, “I’ve found a treasure!”

The three students fell to work scratching and digging where the ball
had fallen, and by-and-by they found something. It was a chest with an
iron ring in the lid. It took all three of them to haul it up out of
the ground, and when they did so they found it was full to the brim of
silver money.

Were they happy? Well, they were happy! They danced around and around
the chest, for they had never seen so much money in all their lives
before. “Brothers,” said Joseph, in exultation, “here is enough for all
hands, and it shall be share and share alike with us, for haven’t we
studied seven long years together?” And so for a while they were as
happy as happy could be.

But by-and-by a flock of second thoughts began to buzz in the heads
of John and Jacob Stuck. “Why,” said they, “as for that, to be sure, a
chest of silver money is a great thing for three students to find who
had nothing better than book-learning to help them along; but who knows
but that there is something better even than silver money out in the
wide world?” So, after all, and in spite of the chest of silver money
they had found, the two of them were for going on to try their fortunes
a little farther. And as for Joseph, why, after all, when he came to
think of it, he was not sorry to have his chest of silver money all to
himself.

So the two travelled on and on for a while, here and there and
everywhere, until at last it was John’s ball that slipped out of his
fingers and fell to the ground. They digged where it fell, and this time
it was a chest of gold money they found.

Yes, a chest of gold money! A chest of real gold money! They just stood
and stared and stared, for if they had not seen it they would not have
believed that such a thing could have been in the world. “Well, Jacob
Stuck,” said John, “it was well to travel a bit farther than poor Joseph
did, was it not? What is a chest of silver money to such a treasure as
this? Come, brother, here is enough to make us both rich for all the
rest of our lives. We need look for nothing better than this.”

But no; by-and-by Jacob Stuck began to cool down again, and now that
second thoughts were coming to him he would not even be satisfied with a
half-share of a chest of gold money. No; maybe there might be something
better than even a chest full of gold money to be found in the world.
As for John, why, after all, he was just as well satisfied to keep
his treasure for himself. So the two shook hands, and then Jacob Stuck
jogged away alone, leaving John stuffing his pockets and his hat full of
gold money, and I should have liked to have been there, to have had my
share.

Well, Jacob Stuck jogged on and on by himself, until after a while he
came to a great, wide desert, where there was not a blade or a stick to
be seen far or near. He jogged on and on, and he wished he had not
come there. He jogged on and on when all of a sudden the glass ball he
carried slipped out of his fingers and fell to the ground.

“Aha!” said he to himself, “now maybe I shall find some great treasure
compared to which even silver and gold are as nothing at all.”

He digged down into the barren earth of the desert; and he digged and he
digged, but neither silver nor gold did he find. He digged and digged;
and by-and-by, at last, he did find something. And what was it? Why,
nothing but something that looked like a piece of blue glass not a
big bigger than my thumb. “Is that all?” said Jacob Stuck. “And have I
travelled all this weary way and into the blinding desert only for this?
Have I passed by silver and gold enough to make me rich for all my life,
only to find a little piece of blue glass?”

Jacob Stuck did not know what he had found. I shall tell you what it
was. It was a solid piece of good luck without flaw or blemish, and it
was almost the only piece I ever heard tell of. Yes; that was what it
was--a solid piece of good luck; and as for Jacob Stuck, why, he was
not the first in the world by many and one over who has failed to know
a piece of good luck when they have found it. Yes; it looked just like a
piece of blue glass no bigger than my thumb, and nothing else.

“Is that all?” said Jacob Stuck. “And have I travelled all this weary
way and into the blinding desert only for this? Have I passed by silver
and gold enough to make me rich for all my life, only to find a little
piece of blue glass?”

He looked at the bit of glass, and he turned it over and over in his
hand. It was covered with dirt. Jacob Stuck blew his breath upon it, and
rubbed it with his thumb.

Crack! dong! bang! smash!

Upon my word, had a bolt of lightning burst at Jacob Stuck’s feet he
could not have been more struck of a heap. For no sooner had he rubbed
the glass with his thumb than with a noise like a clap of thunder there
instantly stood before him a great, big man, dressed in clothes as red
as a flame, and with eyes that shone sparks of fire. It was the Genie of
Good Luck. It nearly knocked Jacob Stuck off his feet to see him there
so suddenly.

“What will you have?” said the Genie. “I am the slave of good luck.
Whosoever holds that piece of crystal in his hand him must I obey in
whatsoever he may command.”

“Do you mean that you are my servant and that I am your master?” said
Jacob Stuck.

“Yes; command and I obey.”

“Why, then,” said Jacob Stuck, “I would like you to help me out of this
desert place, if you can do so, for it is a poor spot for any Christian
soul to be.”

“To hear is to obey,” said the Genie, and, before Jacob Stuck knew what
had happened to him, the Genie had seized him and was flying with him
through the air swifter than the wind. On and on he flew, and the earth
seemed to slide away beneath. On and on flew the flame-colored Genie
until at last he set Jacob down in a great meadow where there was a
river. Beyond the river were the white walls and grand houses of the
king’s town.

“Hast thou any further commands?” said the Genie.

“Tell me what you can do for me?” said Jacob Stuck.

“I can do whatsoever thou mayest order me to do,” said the Genie.

“Well, then,” said Jacob Stuck, “I think first of all I would like to
have plenty of money to spend.”

“To hear is to obey,” said the Genie, and, as he spoke, he reached up
into the air and picked out a purse from nothing at all. “Here,” said
he, “is the purse of fortune; take from it all that thou needest and
yet it will always be full. As long as thou hast it thou shalt never be
lacking riches.”

“I am very much obliged to you,” said Jacob Stuck. “I’ve learned
geometry and algebra and astronomy and the hidden arts, but I never
heard tell of anything like this before.”

So Jacob Stuck went into the town with all the money he could spend, and
such a one is welcome anywhere. He lacked nothing that money could buy.
He bought himself a fine house; he made all the friends he wanted,
and more; he lived without a care, and with nothing to do but to enjoy
himself. That was what a bit of good luck did for him.

Now the princess, the daughter of the king of that town, was the most
beautiful in all the world, but so proud and haughty that her like was
not to be found within the bounds of all the seven rivers. So proud
was she and so haughty that she would neither look upon a young man
nor allow any young man to look upon her. She was so particular that
whenever she went out to take a ride a herald was sent through the
town with a trumpet ordering that every house should be closed and that
everybody should stay within doors, so that the princess should run no
risk of seeing a young man, or that no young man by chance should see
her.

One day the herald went through the town blowing his trumpet and calling
in a great, loud voice: “Close your doors! Close your windows! Her
highness, the princess, comes to ride; let no man look upon her on pain
of death!”

Thereupon everybody began closing their doors and windows, and, as it
was with the others, so it was with Jacob Stuck’s house; it had, like
all the rest, to be shut up as tight as a jug.

But Jacob Stuck was not satisfied with that; not he. He was for seeing
the princess, and he was bound he would do so. So he bored a hole
through the door, and when the princess came riding by he peeped out at
her.

Jacob Stuck thought he had never seen anyone so beautiful in all his
life. It was like the sunlight shining in his eyes, and he almost
sneezed. Her cheeks were like milk and rose-leaves, and her hair like
fine threads of gold. She sat in a golden coach with a golden crown
upon her head, and Jacob Stuck stood looking and looking until his heart
melted within him like wax in the oven. Then the princess was gone, and
Jacob Stuck stood there sighing and sighing.

“Oh, dear! Dear!” said he, “what shall I do? For, proud as she is, I
must see her again or else I will die of it.”

All that day he sat sighing and thinking about the beautiful princess,
until the evening had come. Then he suddenly thought of his piece of
good luck. He pulled his piece of blue glass out of his pocket and
breathed upon it and rubbed it with his thumb, and instantly the Genie
was there.

This time Jacob Stuck was not frightened at all.

“What are thy commands, O master?” said the Genie.

“O Genie!” said Jacob Stuck, “I have seen the princess to-day, and it
seems to me that there is nobody like her in all the world. Tell me,
could you bring her here so that I might see her again?”

“Yes,” said the Genie, “I could.”

“Then do so,” said Jacob Stuck, “and I will have you prepare a grand
feast, and have musicians to play beautiful music, for I would have the
princess sup with me.”

“To hear is to obey,” said the Genie. As he spoke he smote his hands
together, and instantly there appeared twenty musicians, dressed in
cloth of gold and silver. With them they brought hautboys and fiddles,
big and little, and flageolets and drums and horns, and this and that to
make music with. Again the Genie smote his hands together, and instantly
there appeared fifty servants dressed in silks and satins and spangled
with jewels, who began to spread a table with fine linen embroidered
with gold, and to set plates of gold and silver upon it. The Genie smote
his hands together a third time, and in answer there came six servants.
They led Jacob Stuck into another room, where there was a bath of musk
and rose-water. They bathed him in the bath and dressed him in clothes
like an emperor, and when he came out again his face shone, and he was
as handsome as a picture.

Then by-and-by he knew that the princess was coming, for suddenly there
was the sound of girls’ voices singing and the twanging of stringed
instruments. The door flew open, and in came a crowd of beautiful girls,
singing and playing music, and after them the princess herself, more
beautiful than ever. But the proud princess was frightened! Yes, she
was. And well she might be, for the Genie had flown with her through the
air from the palace, and that is enough to frighten anybody. Jacob Stuck
came to her all glittering and shining with jewels and gold, and took
her by the hand. He led her up the hall, and as he did so the musicians
struck up and began playing the most beautiful music in the world. Then
Jacob Stuck and the princess sat down to supper and began eating and
drinking, and Jacob Stuck talked of all the sweetest things he could
think of. Thousands of wax candles made the palace bright as day, and as
the princess looked about her she thought she had never seen anything so
fine in all the world. After they had eaten their supper and ended with
a dessert of all kinds of fruits and of sweetmeats, the door opened and
there came a beautiful young serving-lad, carrying a silver tray, upon
which was something wrapped in a napkin. He kneeled before Jacob Stuck
and held the tray, and from the napkin Jacob Stuck took a necklace of
diamonds, each stone as big as a pigeon’s egg.

“This is to remind you of me,” said Jacob Stuck, “when you have gone
home again.” And as he spoke he hung it around the princess’s neck.

Just then the clock struck twelve.

Hardly had the last stroke sounded when every light was snuffed out, and
all was instantly dark and still. Then, before she had time to think,
the Genie of Good Luck snatched the princess up once more and flew back
to the palace more swiftly than the wind. And, before the princess knew
what had happened to her, there she was.

It was all so strange that the princess might have thought it was a
dream, only for the necklace of diamonds, the like of which was not to
be found in all the world.

The next morning there was a great buzzing in the palace, you may be
sure. The princess told all about how she had been carried away during
the night, and had supped in such a splendid palace, and with such
a handsome man dressed like an emperor. She showed her necklace of
diamonds, and the king and his prime-minister could not look at it or
wonder at it enough. The prime-minister and the king talked and talked
the matter over together, and every now and then the proud princess put
in a word of her own.

“Anybody,” said the prime-minister, “can see with half an eye that it is
all magic, or else it is a wonderful piece of good luck. Now, I’ll tell
you what shall be done,” said he: “the princess shall keep a piece of
chalk by her; and, if she is carried away again in such a fashion, she
shall mark a cross with the piece of chalk on the door of the house to
which she is taken. Then we shall find the rogue that is playing such a
trick, and that quickly enough.”

“Yes,” said the king; “that is very good advice.”

“I will do it,” said the princess.

All that day Jacob Stuck sat thinking and thinking about the beautiful
princess. He could not eat a bite, and he could hardly wait for the
night to come. As soon as it had fallen, he breathed upon his piece of
glass and rubbed his thumb upon it, and there stood the Genie of Good
Luck.

“I’d like the princess here again,” said he, “as she was last night,
with feasting and drinking, such as we had before.”

“To hear is to obey,” said the Genie.

And as it had been the night before, so it was now. The Genie brought
the princess, and she and Jacob Stuck feasted together until nearly
midnight. Then, again, the door opened, and the beautiful servant-lad
came with the tray and something upon it covered with a napkin. Jacob
Stuck unfolded the napkin, and this time it was a cup made of a single
ruby, and filled to the brim with gold money. And the wonder of the
cup was this: that no matter how much money you took out of it, it was
always full. “Take this,” said Jacob Stuck, “to remind you of me.” Then
the clock struck twelve, and instantly all was darkness, and the Genie
carried the princess home again.

But the princess had brought her piece of chalk with her, as the
prime-minister had advised; and in some way or other she contrived,
either in coming or going, to mark a cross upon the door of Jacob
Stuck’s house.

But, clever as she was, the Genie of Good Luck was more clever still. He
saw what the princess did; and, as soon as he had carried her home, he
went all through the town and marked a cross upon every door, great and
small, little and big, just as the princess had done upon the door of
Jacob Stuck’s house, only upon the prime-minister’s door he put two
crosses. The next morning everybody was wondering what all the crosses
on the house-doors meant, and the king and the prime-minister were no
wiser than they had been before.

But the princess had brought the ruby cup with her, and she and the king
could not look at it and wonder at it enough.

“Pooh!” said the prime-minister; “I tell you it is nothing else in the
world but just a piece of good luck--that is all it is. As for the
rogue who is playing all these tricks, let the princess keep a pair of
scissors by her, and, if she is carried away again, let her contrive
to cut off a lock of his hair from over the young man’s right ear. Then
to-morrow we will find out who has been trimmed.”

Yes, the princess would do that; so, before evening was come, she tied a
pair of scissors to her belt.

Well, Jacob Stuck could hardly wait for the night to come to summon the
Genie of Good Luck. “I want to sup with the princess again,” said he.

“To hear is to obey,” said the Genie of Good Luck; and, as soon as he
had made everything ready, away he flew to fetch the princess again.

Well, they feasted and drank, and the music played, and the candles were
as bright as day, and beautiful girls sang and danced, and Jacob Stuck
was as happy as a king. But the princess kept her scissors by her, and,
when Jacob Stuck was not looking, she contrived to snip off a lock of
his hair from over his right ear, and nobody saw what was done but the
Genie of Good Luck.

And it came towards midnight.

Once more the door opened, and the beautiful serving-lad came into the
room, carrying the tray of silver with something upon it wrapped in a
napkin. This time Jacob Stuck gave the princess an emerald ring for a
keepsake, and the wonder of it was that every morning two other rings
just like it would drop from it.

Then twelve o’clock sounded, the lights went out, and the Genie took the
princess home again.

But the Genie had seen what the princess had done. As soon as he had
taken her safe home, he struck his palms together and summoned all his
companions. “Go,” said he, “throughout the town and trim a lock of hair
from over the right ear of every man in the whole place;” and so they
did, from the king himself to the beggar-man at the gates. As for the
prime-minister, the Genie himself trimmed two locks of hair from him,
one from over each of his ears, so that the next morning he looked as
shorn as an old sheep. In the morning all the town was in a hubbub, and
everybody was wondering how all the men came to have their hair clipped
as it was. But the princess had brought the lock of Jacob Stuck’s hair
away with her wrapped up in a piece of paper, and there it was.

As for the ring Jacob Stuck had given to her, why, the next morning
there were three of them, and the king thought he had never heard tell
of such a wonderful thing.

“I tell you,” said the prime-minister, “there is nothing in it but a
piece of good luck, and not a grain of virtue. It’s just a piece of good
luck--that’s all it is.”

“No matter,” said the king; “I never saw the like of it in all my life
before. And now, what are we going to do?”

The prime-minister could think of nothing.

Then the princess spoke up. “Your majesty,” she said, “I can find the
young man for you. Just let the herald go through the town and proclaim
that I will marry the young man to whom this lock of hair belongs, and
then we will find him quickly enough.”

“What!” cried the prime-minister; “will, then, the princess marry a man
who has nothing better than a little bit of good luck to help him along
in the world?”

“Yes,” said the princess, “I shall if I can find him.”

So the herald was sent out around the town proclaiming that the princess
would marry the man to whose head belonged the lock of hair that she
had.

A lock of hair! Why, every man had lost a lock of hair! Maybe the
princess could fit it on again, and then the fortune of him to whom it
belonged would be made. All the men in the town crowded up to the king’s
palace. But all for no use, for never a one of them was fitted with his
own hair.

As for Jacob Stuck, he too had heard what the herald had proclaimed.
Yes; he too had heard it, and his heart jumped and hopped within him
like a young lamb in the spring-time. He knew whose hair it was the
princess had. Away he went by himself, and rubbed up his piece of blue
glass, and there stood the Genie.

“What are thy commands?” said he.

“I am,” said Jacob Stuck, “going up to the king’s palace to marry the
princess, and I would have a proper escort.”

“To hear is to obey,” said the Genie.

He smote his hands together, and instantly there appeared a score of
attendants who took Jacob Stuck, and led him into another room, and
began clothing him in a suit so magnificent that it dazzled the eyes to
look at it. He smote his hands together again, and out in the court-yard
there appeared a troop of horsemen to escort Jacob Stuck to the palace,
and they were all clad in gold-and-silver armor. He smote his hands
together again, and there appeared twenty-and-one horses--twenty as
black as night and one as white as milk, and it twinkled and sparkled
all over with gold and jewels, and at the head of each horse of the
one-and-twenty horses stood a slave clad in crimson velvet to hold the
bridle. Again he smote his hands together, and there appeared in the
ante-room twenty handsome young men, each with a marble bowl filled with
gold money, and when Jacob Stuck came out dressed in his fine clothes
there they all were.

Jacob Stuck mounted upon the horse as white as milk, the young
men mounted each upon one of the black horses, the troopers in the
gold-and-silver armor wheeled their horses, the trumpets blew, and away
they rode--such a sight as was never seen in that town before, when they
had come out into the streets. The young men with the basins scattered
the gold money to the people, and a great crowd ran scrambling after,
and shouted and cheered.

So Jacob Stuck rode up to the king’s palace, and the king himself came
out to meet him with the princess hanging on his arm.

As for the princess, she knew him the moment she laid eyes on him. She
came down the steps, and set the lock of hair against his head, where
she had trimmed it off the night before, and it fitted and matched
exactly. “This is the young man,” said she, “and I will marry him, and
none other.”

But the prime-minister whispered and whispered in the king’s ear: “I
tell you this young man is nobody at all,” said he, “but just some
fellow who has had a little bit of good luck.”

“Pooh!” said the king, “stuff and nonsense! Just look at all the gold
and jewels and horses and men. What will you do,” said he to Jacob
Stuck, “if I let you marry the princess?”

“I will,” said Jacob Stuck, “build for her the finest palace that ever
was seen in all this world.”

“Very well,” said the king, “yonder are those sand hills over there. You
shall remove them and build your palace there. When it is finished you
shall marry the princess.” For if he does that, thought the king to
himself, it is something better than mere good luck.

“It shall,” said Jacob Stuck, “be done by tomorrow morning.”

Well, all that day Jacob Stuck feasted and made merry at the king’s
palace, and the king wondered when he was going to begin to build his
palace. But Jacob Stuck said nothing at all; he just feasted and drank
and made merry. When night had come, however, it was all different. Away
he went by himself, and blew his breath upon his piece of blue glass,
and rubbed it with his thumb. Instantly there stood the Genie before
him. “What wouldst thou have?” said he.

“I would like,” said Jacob Stuck, “to have the sand hills over yonder
carried away, and a palace built there of white marble and gold and
silver, such as the world never saw before. And let there be gardens
planted there with flowering plants and trees, and let there be
fountains and marble walks. And let there be servants and attendants
in the palace of all sorts and kinds--men and women. And let there be
a splendid feast spread for to-morrow morning, for then I am going to
marry the princess.”

“To hear is to obey,” said the Genie, and instantly he was gone.

All night there was from the sand hills a ceaseless sound as of
thunder--a sound of banging and clapping and hammering and sawing and
calling and shouting. All that night the sounds continued unceasingly,
but at daybreak all was still, and when the sun arose there stood the
most splendid palace it ever looked down upon; shining as white as
snow, and blazing with gold and silver. All around it were gardens and
fountains and orchards. A great highway had been built between it and
the king’s palace, and all along the highway a carpet of cloth of gold
had been spread for the princess to walk upon.

Dear! Dear! How all the town stared with wonder when they saw such a
splendid palace standing where the day before had been nothing but naked
sand hills! The folk flocked in crowds to see it, and all the country
about was alive with people coming and going. As for the king, he could
not believe his eyes when he saw it. He stood with the princess and
looked and looked. Then came Jacob Stuck. “And now,” said he, “am I to
marry the princess?”

“Yes,” cried the king in admiration, “you are!”

So Jacob Stuck married the princess, and a splendid wedding it was. That
was what a little bit of good luck did for him.

After the wedding was over, it was time to go home to the grand new
palace. Then there came a great troop of horsemen with shining armor and
with music, sent by the Genie to escort Jacob Stuck and the princess and
the king and the prime-minister to Jacob Stuck’s new palace. They rode
along over the carpet of gold, and such a fine sight was never seen
in that land before. As they drew near to the palace a great crowd of
servants, clad in silks and satins and jewels, came out to meet them,
singing and dancing and playing on harps and lutes. The king and the
princess thought that they must be dreaming.

“All this is yours,” said Jacob Stuck to the princess; and he was that
fond of her, he would have given her still more if he could have thought
of anything else.

Jacob Stuck and the princess, and the king and the prime-minister, all
went into the palace, and there was a splendid feast spread in plates of
pure gold and silver, and they all four sat down together.

But the prime-minister was as sour about it all as a crab-apple. All the
time they were feasting he kept whispering and whispering in the king’s
ear. “It is all stuff and nonsense,” said he, “for such a man as Jacob
Stuck to do all this by himself. I tell you, it is all a piece of good
luck, and not a bit of merit in it.”

He whispered and whispered, until at last the king up and spoke. “Tell
me, Jacob Stuck,” he said, “where do you get all these fine things?”

“It all comes of a piece of good luck,” said Jacob Stuck.

“That is what I told you,” said the prime-minister.

“A piece of good luck!” said the king. “Where did you come across such a
piece of good luck?”

“I found it,” said Jacob Stuck.

“Found it!” said the king; “and have you got it with you now?”

“Yes, I have,” said Jacob Stuck; “I always carry it about with me;” and
he thrust his hand into his pocket and brought out his piece of blue
crystal.

“That!” said the king. “Why, that is nothing but a piece of blue glass!”

“That,” said Jacob Stuck, “is just what I thought till I found out
better. It is no common piece of glass, I can tell you. You just breathe
upon it so, and rub your thumb upon it thus, and instantly a Genie
dressed in red comes to do all that he is bidden. That is how it is.”

“I should like to see it,” said the king.

“So you shall,” said Jacob Stuck; “here it is,” said he; and he reached
it across the table to the prime-minister to give it to the king.

Yes, that was what he did; he gave it to the prime-minister to give it
to the king. The prime-minister had been listening to all that had been
said, and he knew what he was about. He took what Jacob Stuck gave him,
and he had never had such a piece of luck come to him before.

And did the prime-minister give it to the king, as Jacob Stuck had
intended? Not a bit of it. No sooner had he got it safe in his hand,
than he blew his breath upon it and rubbed it with his thumb.

Crack! dong! boom! crash!

There stood the Genie, like a flash and as red as fire. The princess
screamed out and nearly fainted at the sight, and the poor king sat
trembling like a rabbit.

“Whosoever possesses that piece of blue crystal,” said the Genie, in a
terrible voice, “him must I obey. What are thy commands?”

“Take this king,” cried the prime-minister, “and take Jacob Stuck, and
carry them both away into the farthest part of the desert whence the
fellow came.”

“To hear is to obey,” said the Genie; and instantly he seized the
king in one hand and Jacob Stuck in the other, and flew away with them
swifter than the wind. On and on he flew, and the earth seemed to slide
away beneath them like a cloud. On and on he flew until he had come to
the farthest part of the desert. There he sat them both down, and it was
as pretty a pickle as ever the king or Jacob Stuck had been in, in all
of their lives. Then the Genie flew back again whence he had come.

There sat the poor princess crying and crying, and there sat the
prime-minister trying to comfort her. “Why do you cry?” said he; “why
are you afraid of me? I will do you no harm. Listen,” said he; “I will
use this piece of good luck in a way that Jacob Stuck would never have
thought of. I will make myself king. I will conquer the world, and make
myself emperor over all the earth. Then I will make you my queen.”

But the poor princess cried and cried.

“Hast thou any further commands?” said the Genie.

“Not now,” said the prime-minister; “you may go now;” and the Genie
vanished like a puff of smoke.

But the princess cried and cried.

The prime-minister sat down beside her. “Why do you cry?” said he.

“Because I am afraid of you,” said she.

“And why are you afraid of me?” said he.

“Because of that piece of blue glass. You will rub it again, and then
that great red monster will come again to frighten me.”

“I will rub it no more,” said he.

“Oh, but you will,” said she; “I know you will.”

“I will not,” said he.

“But I can’t trust you,” said she “as long as you hold it in your hand.”

“Then I will lay it aside,” said he, and so he did. Yes, he did; and he
is not the first man who has thrown aside a piece of good luck for the
sake of a pretty face. “Now are you afraid of me?” said he.

“No, I am not,” said she; and she reached out her hand as though to give
it to him. But, instead of doing so, she snatched up the piece of blue
glass as quick as a flash.

“Now,” said she, “it is my turn;” and then the prime-minister knew that
his end had come.

She blew her breath upon the piece of blue glass and rubbed her thumb
upon it. Instantly, as with a clap of thunder, the great red Genie stood
before her, and the poor prime-minister sat shaking and trembling.

“Whosoever hath that piece of blue crystal,” said the Genie, “that one
must I obey. What are your orders, O princess?”

“Take this man,” cried the princess, “and carry him away into the desert
where you took those other two, and bring my father and Jacob Stuck back
again.”

“To hear is to obey,” said the Genie, and instantly he seized the
prime-minister, and, in spite of the poor man’s kicks and struggles,
snatched him up and flew away with him swifter than the wind. On and on
he flew until he had come to the farthest part of the desert, and
there sat the king and Jacob Stuck still thinking about things. Down he
dropped the prime-minister, up he picked the king and Jacob Stuck,
and away he flew swifter than the wind. On and on he flew until he had
brought the two back to the palace again; and there sat the princess
waiting for them, with the piece of blue crystal in her hand.

“You have saved us!” cried the king.

“You have saved us!” cried Jacob Stuck. “Yes, you have saved us, and you
have my piece of good luck into the bargain. Give it to me again.”

“I will do nothing of the sort,” said the princess. “If the men folk
think no more of a piece of good luck than to hand it round like a bit
of broken glass, it is better for the women folk to keep it for them.”

And there, to my mind, she brewed good common-sense, that needed no
skimming to make it fit for Jacob Stuck, or for any other man, for the
matter of that.

And now for the end of this story. Jacob Stuck lived with his princess
in his fine palace as grand as a king, and when the old king died he
became the king after him.

One day there came two men travelling along, and they were footsore and
weary. They stopped at Jacob Stuck’s palace and asked for something to
eat. Jacob Stuck did not know them at first, and then he did. One was
Joseph and the other was John.

This is what had happened to them:

Joseph had sat and sat where John and Jacob Stuck had left him on his
box of silver money, until a band of thieves had come along and robbed
him of it all. John had carried away his pockets and his hat full of
gold, and had lived like a prince as long as it had lasted. Then he had
gone back for more, but in the meantime some rogue had come along and
had stolen it all. Yes; that was what had happened, and now they were as
poor as ever.

Jacob Stuck welcomed them and brought them in and made much of them.

Well, the truth is truth, and this is it: It is better to have a little
bit of good luck to help one in what one undertakes than to have a chest
of silver or a chest of gold.


“And now for your story, holy knight,” said Fortunatus to St. George
“for twas your turn, only for this fair lady who came in before you.”

“Aye, aye,” said the saint; “I suppose it was, in sooth, my turn.
Ne’th’less, it gives me joy to follow so close so fair and lovely a
lady.” And as he spoke he winked one eye at Cinderella, beckoned towards
her with his cup of ale, and took a deep draught to her health. “I shall
tell you,” said he, as soon as he had caught his breath again, “a
story about an angel and a poor man who travelled with him, and all the
wonderful things the poor man saw the angel do.”

“That,” said the Blacksmith who made Death sit in his pear-tree until
the wind whistled through his ribs--“that, methinks, is a better thing
to tell for a sermon than a story.”

“Whether or no that shall be so,” said St. George, “you shall presently
hear for yourselves.”

He took another deep draught of ale, and then cleared his throat.

“Stop a bit, my friend,” said Ali Baba. “What is your story about?”

“It is,” said St. George, “about--”




The Fruit of Happiness

Once upon a time there was a servant who served a wise man, and cooked
for him his cabbage and his onions and his pot-herbs and his broth, day
after day, time in and time out, for seven years.

In those years the servant was well enough contented, but no one likes
to abide in the same place forever, and so one day he took it into his
head that he would like to go out into the world to see what kind of a
fortune a man might make there for himself. “Very well,” says the wise
man, the servant’s master; “you have served me faithfully these seven
years gone, and now that you ask leave to go you shall go. But it is
little or nothing in the way of money that I can give you, and so you
will have to be content with what I can afford. See, here is a little
pebble, and its like is not to be found in the seven kingdoms, for
whoever holds it in his mouth can hear while he does so all that the
birds and the beasts say to one another. Take it--it is yours, and, if
you use it wisely, it may bring you a fortune.”

The servant would rather have had the money in hand than the magic
pebble, but, as nothing better was to be had, he took the little stone,
and, bidding his master good-bye, trudged out into the world, to seek
his fortune. Well, he jogged on and on, paying his way with the few
pennies he had saved in his seven years of service, but for all of his
travelling nothing of good happened to him until, one morning, he came
to a lonely place where there stood a gallows, and there he sat him down
to rest, and it is just in such an unlikely place as this that a man’s
best chance of fortune comes to him sometimes.

As the servant sat there, there came two ravens flying, and lit upon the
cross-beam overhead. There they began talking to one another, and the
servant popped the pebble into his mouth to hear what they might say.

“Yonder is a traveller in the world,” said the first raven.

“Yes,” said the second, “and if he only knew how to set about it, his
fortune is as good as made.”

“How is that so?” said the first raven.

“Why, thus,” said the second. “If he only knew enough to follow yonder
road over the hill, he would come by-and-by to a stone cross where two
roads meet, and there he would find a man sitting. If he would ask it of
him, that man would lead him to the garden where the fruit of happiness
grows.”

“The fruit of happiness!” said the first raven, “and of what use would
the fruit of happiness be to him?”

“What use? I tell you, friend, there is no fruit in the world like that,
for one has only to hold it in one’s hand and wish, and whatever one
asks for one shall have.”

You may guess that when the servant understood the talk of the ravens he
was not slow in making use of what he heard. Up he scrambled, and away
he went as fast as his legs could carry him. On and on he travelled,
until he came to the cross-roads and the stone cross of which the raven
spoke, and there, sure enough, sat the traveller. He was clad in a
weather-stained coat, and he wore dusty boots, and the servant bade him
good-morning.

How should the servant know that it was an angel whom he beheld, and not
a common wayfarer?

“Whither away, comrade,” asked the traveller.

“Out in the world,” said the servant, “to seek my fortune. And what I
want to know is this--will you guide me to where I can find the fruit of
happiness?”

“You ask a great thing of me,” said the other; “nevertheless, since you
do ask it, it is not for me to refuse, though I may tell you that many
a man has sought for that fruit, and few indeed have found it. But if
I guide you to the garden where the fruit grows, there is one condition
you must fulfil: many strange things will happen upon our journey
between here and there, but concerning all you see you must ask not a
question and say not a word. Do you agree to that?”

“Yes,” said the servant, “I do.”

“Very well,” said his new comrade; “then let us be jogging, for I have
business in the town to-night, and the time is none too long to get
there.”

So all the rest of that day they journeyed onward together, until,
towards evening, they came to a town with high towers and steep roofs
and tall spires. The servant’s companion entered the gate as though
he knew the place right well, and led the way up one street and down
another, until, by-and-by, they came to a noble house that stood a
little apart by itself, with gardens of flowers and fruit-trees all
around it. There the travelling companion stopped, and, drawing out a
little pipe from under his jacket, began playing so sweetly upon it that
he made one’s heart stand still to listen to the music.

Well, he played and played until, by-and-by, the door opened, and out
came a serving-man. “Ho, piper!” said he, “would you like to earn good
wages for your playing?”

“Yes,” said the travelling companion, “I would, for that is why I came
hither.”

“Then follow me,” said the servant, and thereupon the travelling
companion tucked away his pipe and entered, with the other at his heels.

The house-servant led the way from one room to another, each grander
than the one they left behind, until at last he came to a great hall
where dozens of servants were serving a fine feast. But only one man
sat at table--a young man with a face so sorrowful that it made a body’s
heart ache to look upon him. “Can you play good music, piper?” said he.

“Yes,” said the piper, “that I can, for I know a tune that can cure
sorrow. But before I blow my pipe I and my friend here must have
something to eat and drink, for one cannot play well with an empty
stomach.”

“So be it,” said the young man; “sit down with me and eat and drink.”

So the two did without second bidding, and such food and drink the
serving-man had never tasted in his life before. And while they were
feasting together the young man told them his story, and why it was
he was so sad. A year before he had married a young lady, the most
beautiful in all that kingdom, and had friends and comrades and all
things that a man could desire in the world. But suddenly everything
went wrong; his wife and he fell out and quarrelled until there was
no living together, and she had to go back to her old home. Then his
companions deserted him, and now he lived all alone.

“Yours is a hard case,” said the travelling companion, “but it is not
past curing.” Thereupon he drew out his pipes and began to play, and
it was such a tune as no man ever listened to before. He played and he
played, and, after a while, one after another of those who listened to
him began to get drowsy. First they winked, then they shut their eyes,
and then they nodded until all were as dumb as logs, and as sound asleep
as though they would never waken again. Only the servant and the piper
stayed awake, for the music did not make them drowsy as it did the rest.
Then, when all but they two were tight and fast asleep, the travelling
companion arose, tucked away his pipe, and, stepping up to the young
man, took from off his finger a splendid ruby ring, as red as blood
and as bright as fire, and popped the same into his pocket. And all the
while the serving-man stood gaping like a fish to see what his comrade
was about. “Come,” said the travelling companion, “it is time we were
going,” and off they went, shutting the door behind them.

As for the serving-man, though he remembered his promise and said
nothing concerning what he had beheld, his wits buzzed in his head like
a hive of bees, for he thought that of all the ugly tricks he had seen,
none was more ugly than this--to bewitch the poor sorrowful young man
into a sleep, and then to rob him of his ruby ring after he had fed them
so well and had treated them so kindly.

But the next day they jogged on together again until by-and-by they came
to a great forest. There they wandered up and down till night came upon
them and found them still stumbling onward through the darkness, while
the poor serving-man’s flesh quaked to hear the wild beasts and the
wolves growling and howling around them.

But all the while the angel--his travelling companion--said never a
word; he seemed to doubt nothing nor fear nothing, but trudged straight
ahead until, by-and-by, they saw a light twinkling far away, and, when
they came to it, they found a gloomy stone house, as ugly as eyes ever
looked upon. Up stepped the servant’s comrade and knocked upon the
door--rap! tap! tap! By-and-by it was opened a crack, and there stood an
ugly old woman, blear-eyed and crooked and gnarled as a winter twig.
But the heart within her was good for all that. “Alas, poor folk!”
 she cried, “why do you come here? This is a den where lives a band of
wicked thieves. Every day they go out to rob and murder poor travellers
like yourselves. By-and-by they will come back, and when they find you
here they will certainly kill you.”

“No matter for that,” said the travelling companion; “we can go no
farther to-night, so you must let us in and hide us as best you may.”

And in he went, as he said, with the servant at his heels trembling like
a leaf at what he had heard. The old woman gave them some bread and
meat to eat, and then hid them away in the great empty meal-chest in the
corner, and there they lay as still as mice.

By-and-by in came the gang of thieves with a great noise and uproar,
and down they sat to their supper. The poor servant lay in the chest
listening to all they said of the dreadful things they had done that
day--how they had cruelly robbed and murdered poor people. Every word
that they said he heard, and he trembled until his teeth chattered in
his head. But all the same the robbers knew nothing of the two being
there, and there they lay until near the dawning of the day. Then the
travelling companion bade the servant be stirring, and up they got, and
out of the chest they came, and found all the robbers sound asleep and
snoring so that the dust flew.

“Stop a bit,” said the angel--the travelling companion--“we must pay
them for our lodging.”

As he spoke he drew from his pocket the ruby ring which he had stolen
from the sorrowful young man’s finger, and dropped it into the cup from
which the robber captain drank. Then he led the way out of the house,
and, if the serving-man had wondered the day before at that which the
comrade did, he wondered ten times more to see him give so beautiful a
ring to such wicked and bloody thieves.

The third evening of their journey the two travellers came to a little
hut, neat enough, but as poor as poverty, and there the comrade knocked
upon the door and asked for lodging. In the house lived a poor man and
his wife; and, though the two were as honest as the palm of your hand,
and as good and kind as rain in spring-time, they could hardly scrape
enough of a living to keep body and soul together. Nevertheless, they
made the travellers welcome, and set before them the very best that was
to be had in the house; and, after both had eaten and drunk, they showed
them to bed in a corner as clean as snow, and there they slept the night
through.

But the next morning, before the dawning of the day, the travelling
companion was stirring again. “Come,” said he; “rouse yourself, for I
have a bit of work to do before I leave this place.”

And strange work it was! When they had come outside of the house, he
gathered together a great heap of straw and sticks of wood, and stuffed
all under the corner of the house. Then he struck a light and set fire
to it, and, as the two walked away through the gray dawn, all was a red
blaze behind them.

Still, the servant remembered his promise to his travelling comrade,
and said never a word or asked never a question, though all that day he
walked on the other side of the road, and would have nothing to say or
to do with the other. But never a whit did his comrade seem to think
of or to care for that. On they jogged, and, by the time evening was at
hand, they had come to a neat cottage with apple and pear trees around
it, all as pleasant as the eye could desire to see. In this cottage
lived a widow and her only son, and they also made the travellers
welcome, and set before them a good supper and showed them to a clean
bed.

This time the travelling comrade did neither good nor ill to those of
the house, but in the morning he told the widow whither they were going,
and asked if she and her son knew the way to the garden where grew the
fruit of happiness.

“Yes,” said she, “that we do, for the garden is not a day’s journey from
here, and my son himself shall go with you to show you the way.”

“That is good,” said the servant’s comrade, “and if he will do so I will
pay him well for his trouble.”

So the young man put on his hat, and took up his stick, and off went the
three, up hill and down dale, until by-and-by they came over the top of
the last hill, and there below them lay the garden.

And what a sight it was, the leaves shining and glistening like so many
jewels in the sunlight! I only wish that I could tell you how beautiful
that garden was. And in the middle of it grew a golden tree, and on it
golden fruit. The servant, who had travelled so long and so far, could
see it plainly from where he stood, and he did not need to be told that
it was the fruit of happiness. But, after all, all he could do was to
stand and look, for in front of them was a great raging torrent, without
a bridge for a body to cross over.

“Yonder is what you seek,” said the young man, pointing with his finger,
“and there you can see for yourself the fruit of happiness.”

The travelling companion said never a word, good or bad, but, suddenly
catching the widow’s son by the collar, he lifted him and flung him into
the black, rushing water. Splash! went the young man, and then away he
went whirling over rocks and water-falls. “There!” cried the comrade,
“that is your reward for your service!”

When the servant saw this cruel, wicked deed, he found his tongue at
last, and all that he had bottled up for the seven days came frothing
out of him like hot beer. Such abuse as he showered upon his travelling
companion no man ever listened to before. But to all the servant said
the other answered never a word until he had stopped for sheer want of
breath. Then--

“Poor fool,” said the travelling companion, “if you had only held your
tongue a minute longer, you, too, would have had the fruit of happiness
in your hand. Now it will be many a day before you have a sight of it
again.”

Thereupon, as he ended speaking, he struck his staff upon the ground.
Instantly the earth trembled, and the sky darkened overhead until it
grew as black as night. Then came a great flash of fire from up in the
sky, which wrapped the travelling companion about until he was hidden
from sight. Then the flaming fire flew away to heaven again, carrying
him along with it. After that the sky cleared once more, and, lo and
behold! The garden and the torrent and all were gone, and nothing was
left but a naked plain covered over with the bones of those who had
come that way before, seeking the fruit which the travelling servant had
sought.

It was a long time before the servant found his way back into the world
again, and the first house he came to, weak and hungry, was the widow’s.

But what a change he beheld! It was a poor cottage no longer, but a
splendid palace, fit for a queen to dwell in. The widow herself met him
at the door, and she was dressed in clothes fit for a queen to wear,
shining with gold and silver and precious stones.

The servant stood and stared like one bereft of wits. “How comes all
this change?” said he, “and how did you get all these grand things?”

“My son,” said the widow woman, “has just been to the garden, and
has brought home from there the fruit of happiness. Many a day did we
search, but never could we find how to enter into the garden, until, the
other day, an angel came and showed the way to my son, and he was able
not only to gather of the fruit for himself, but to bring an apple for
me also.”

Then the poor travelling servant began to thump his head. He saw well
enough through the millstone now, and that he, too, might have had one
of the fruit if he had but held his tongue a little longer.

Yes, he saw what a fool he had made of himself, when he learned that it
was an angel with whom he had been travelling the five days gone.

But, then, we are all of us like the servant for the matter of that; I,
too, have travelled with an angel many a day, I dare say, and never knew
it.

That night the servant lodged with the widow and her son, and the next
day he started back home again upon the way he had travelled before.
By evening he had reached the place where the house of the poor couple
stood--the house that he had seen the angel set fire to. There he beheld
masons and carpenters hard at work hacking and hewing, and building a
fine new house. And there he saw the poor man himself standing by giving
them orders. “How is this,” said the travelling servant; “I thought that
your house was burned down?”

“So it was, and that is how I came to be rich now,” said the one-time
poor man. “I and my wife had lived in our old house for many a long
day, and never knew that a great treasure of silver and gold was hidden
beneath it, until a few days ago there came an angel and burned it down
over our heads, and in the morning we found the treasure. So now we are
rich for as long as we may live.”

The next morning the poor servant jogged along on his homeward way more
sad and downcast than ever, and by evening he had come to the robbers’
den in the thick woods, and there the old woman came running to the door
to meet him. “Come in!” cried she; “come in and welcome! The robbers are
all dead and gone now, and I use the treasure that they left behind to
entertain poor travellers like yourself. The other day there came an
angel hither, and with him he brought the ring of discord that breeds
spite and rage and quarrelling. He gave it to the captain of the band,
and after he had gone the robbers fought for it with one another until
they were all killed. So now the world is rid of them, and travellers
can come and go as they please.”

Back jogged the travelling servant, and the next day came to the town
and to the house of the sorrowful young man. There, lo and behold!
Instead of being dark and silent, as it was before, all was ablaze
with light and noisy with the sound of rejoicing and merriment. There
happened to be one of the household standing at the door, and he knew
the servant as the companion of that one who had stolen the ruby ring.
Up he came and laid hold of the servant by the collar, calling to his
companions that he had caught one of the thieves. Into the house they
hauled the poor servant, and into the same room where he had been
before, and there sat the young man at a grand feast, with his wife
and all his friends around him. But when the young man saw the poor
serving-man he came to him and took him by the hand, and set him beside
himself at the table. “Nobody except your comrade could be so welcome
as you,” said he, “and this is why. An enemy of mine one time gave me a
ruby ring, and though I knew nothing of it, it was the ring of discord
that bred strife wherever it came. So, as soon as it was brought
into the house, my wife and all my friends fell out with me, and we
quarrelled so that they all left me. But, though I knew it not at that
time, your comrade was an angel, and took the ring away with him, and
now I am as happy as I was sorrowful before.”

By the next night the servant had come back to his home again. Rap! tap!
tap! He knocked at the door, and the wise man who had been his master
opened to him. “What do you want?” said he.

“I want to take service with you again,” said the travelling servant.

“Very well,” said the wise man; “come in and shut the door.”

And for all I know the travelling servant is there to this day. For he
is not the only one in the world who has come in sight of the fruit of
happiness, and then jogged all the way back home again to cook cabbage
and onions and pot-herbs, and to make broth for wiser men than himself
to sup.

That is the end of this story.


“I like your story, holy sir,” said the Blacksmith who made Death sit in
a pear-tree. “Ne’th’less, it hath indeed somewhat the smack of a sermon,
after all. Methinks I am like my friend yonder,” and he pointed with
his thumb towards Fortunatus; “I like to hear a story about treasures of
silver and gold, and about kings and princes--a story that turneth out
well in the end, with everybody happy, and the man himself married in
luck, rather than one that turneth out awry, even if it hath an angel in
it.”

“Well, well,” said St. George, testily, “one cannot please everybody.
But as for being a sermon, why, certes, my story was not that--and even
if it were, it would not have hurt thee, sirrah.”

“No offence,” said the Blacksmith; “I meant not to speak ill of your
story. Come, come, sir, will you not take a pot of ale with me?”

“Why,” said St. George, somewhat mollified, “for the matter of that, I
would as lief as not.”

“I liked the story well enough,” piped up the little Tailor who had
killed seven flies at a blow. “Twas a good enough story of its sort, but
why does nobody tell a tale of good big giants, and of wild boars, and
of unicorns, such as I killed in my adventures you wot of?”

Old Ali Baba had been sitting with his hands folded and his eyes closed.
Now he opened them and looked at the Little Tailor. “I know a story,”
 said he, “about a Genie who was as big as a giant, and six times as
powerful. And besides that,” he added, “the story is all about treasures
of gold, and palaces, and kings, and emperors, and what not, and about
a cave such as that in which I myself found the treasure of the forty
thieves.”

The Blacksmith who made Death sit in the pear-tree clattered the bottom
of his canican against the table. “Aye, aye,” said he, “that is the sort
of story for me. Come, friend, let us have it.”

“Stop a bit,” said Fortunatus; “what is this story mostly about?”

“It is,” said Ali Baba, “about two men betwixt whom there was--”




Not a Pin to Choose.

Once upon a time, in a country in the far East, a merchant was
travelling towards the city with three horses loaded with rich goods,
and a purse containing a hundred pieces of gold money. The day was very
hot, and the road dusty and dry, so that, by-and-by, when he reached a
spot where a cool, clear spring of water came bubbling out from under
a rock beneath the shade of a wide-spreading wayside tree, he was glad
enough to stop and refresh himself with a draught of the clear coolness
and rest awhile. But while he stooped to drink at the fountain the purse
of gold fell from his girdle into the tall grass, and he, not seeing it,
let it lie there, and went his way.

Now it chanced that two fagot-makers--the elder by name Ali, the younger
Abdallah--who had been in the woods all day chopping fagots, came also
travelling the same way, and stopped at the same fountain to drink.
There the younger of the two spied the purse lying in the grass, and
picked it up. But when he opened it and found it full of gold money, he
was like one bereft of wits; he flung his arms, he danced, he shouted,
he laughed, he acted like a madman; for never had he seen so much wealth
in all of his life before--a hundred pieces of gold money!

Now the older of the two was by nature a merry wag, and though he had
never had the chance to taste of pleasure, he thought that nothing in
the world could be better worth spending money for than wine and music
and dancing. So, when the evening had come, he proposed that they
two should go and squander it all at the Inn. But the younger
fellow--Abdallah--was by nature just as thrifty as the other was
spendthrift, and would not consent to waste what he had found.
Nevertheless, he was generous and open-hearted, and grudged his friend
nothing; so, though he did not care for a wild life himself, he gave Ali
a piece of gold to spend as he chose.

By morning every copper of what had been given to the elder fagot-maker
was gone, and he had never had such a good time in his life before. All
that day and for a week the head of Ali was so full of the memory of the
merry night that he had enjoyed that he could think of nothing else.
At last, one evening, he asked Abdallah for another piece of gold, and
Abdallah gave it to him, and by the next morning it had vanished in the
same way that the other had flown. By-and-by Ali borrowed a third piece
of money, and then a fourth and then a fifth, so that by the time that
six months had passed and gone he had spent thirty of the hundred pieces
that had been found, and in all that time Abdallah had used not so much
as a pistareen.

But when Ali came for the thirty-and-first loan, Abdallah refused to
let him have any more money. It was in vain that the elder begged and
implored--the younger abided by what he had said.

Then Ali began to put on a threatening front. “You will not let me have
the money?” he said.

“No, I will not.”

“You will not?”

“No!”

“Then you shall!” cried Ali; and, so saying, caught the younger
fagot-maker by the throat, and began shaking him and shouting, “Help!
Help! I am robbed! I am robbed!” He made such an uproar that half a
hundred men, women, and children were gathered around them in less than
a minute. “Here is ingratitude for you!” cried Ali. “Here is wickedness
and thievery! Look at this wretch, all good men, and then turn away
your eyes! For twelve years have I lived with this young man as a father
might live with a son, and now how does he repay me? He has stolen all
that I have in the world--a purse of seventy sequins of gold.”

All this while poor Abdallah had been so amazed that he could do nothing
but stand and stare like one stricken dumb; whereupon all the people,
thinking him guilty, dragged him off to the judge, reviling him and
heaping words of abuse upon him.

Now the judge of that town was known far and near as the “Wise Judge”;
but never had he had such a knotty question as this brought up before
him, for by this time Abdallah had found his speech, and swore with a
great outcry that the money belonged to him.

But at last a gleam of light came to the Wise Judge in his perplexity.
“Can any one tell me,” said he, “which of these fellows has had money of
late, and which has had none?”

His question was one easily enough answered; a score of people were
there to testify that the elder of the two had been living well and
spending money freely for six months and more, and a score were also
there to swear that Abdallah had lived all the while in penury. “Then
that decides the matter,” said the Wise Judge. “The money belongs to the
elder fagot-maker.”

“But listen, oh my lord judge!” cried Abdallah. “All that this man has
spent I have given to him--I, who found the money. Yes, my lord, I have
given it to him, and myself have spent not so much as single mite.”

All who were present shouted with laughter at Abdallah’s speech, for
who would believe that any one would be so generous as to spend all upon
another and none upon himself?

So poor Abdallah was beaten with rods until he confessed where he had
hidden his money; then the Wise Judge handed fifty sequins to Ali and
kept twenty himself for his decision, and all went their way praising
his justice and judgment.

That is to say, all but poor Abdallah; he went to his home weeping and
wailing, and with every one pointing the finger of scorn at him. He was
just as poor as ever, and his back was sore with the beating that he
had suffered. All that night he continued to weep and wail, and when the
morning had come he was weeping and wailing still.

Now it chanced that a wise man passed that way, and hearing his
lamentation, stopped to inquire the cause of his trouble. Abdallah told
the other of his sorrow, and the wise man listened, smiling, till he was
done, and then he laughed outright. “My son,” said he, “if every one in
your case should shed tears as abundantly as you have done, the world
would have been drowned in salt water by this time. As for your friend,
think not ill of him; no man loveth another who is always giving.”

“Nay,” said the young fagot-maker, “I believe not a word of what
you say. Had I been in his place I would have been grateful for the
benefits, and not have hated the giver.”

But the wise man only laughed louder than ever. “Maybe you will have the
chance to prove what you say some day,” said he, and went his way, still
shaking with his merriment.

“All this,” said Ali Baba, “is only the beginning of my story; and now
if the damsel will fill up my pot of ale, I will begin in earnest and
tell about the cave of the Genie.”

He watched Little Brown Betty until she had filled his mug, and the
froth ran over the top. Then he took a deep draught and began again.

Though Abdallah had affirmed that he did not believe what the wise man
had said, nevertheless the words of the other were a comfort, for it
makes one feel easier in trouble to be told that others have been in a
like case with one’s self.

So, by-and-by, Abdallah plucked up some spirit, and, saddling his
ass and shouldering his axe, started off to the woods for a bundle of
fagots.

Misfortunes, they say, never come single, and so it seemed to be with
the fagot-maker that day; for that happened that had never happened to
him before--he lost his way in the woods. On he went, deeper and deeper
into the thickets, driving his ass before him, bewailing himself and
rapping his head with his knuckles. But all his sorrowing helped him
nothing, and by the time that night fell he found himself deep in the
midst of a great forest full of wild beasts, the very thought of which
curdled his blood. He had had nothing to eat all day long, and now
the only resting-place left him was the branches of some tree. So,
unsaddling his ass and leaving it to shift for itself, he climbed to and
roosted himself in the crotch of a great limb.

In spite of his hunger he presently fell asleep, for trouble breeds
weariness as it breeds grief.

About the dawning of the day he was awakened by the sound of voices and
the glaring of lights. He craned his neck and looked down, and there he
saw a sight that filled him with amazement: three old men riding each
upon a milk-white horse and each bearing a lighted torch in his hand, to
light the way through the dark forest.

When they had come just below where Abdallah sat, they dismounted and
fastened their several horses to as many trees. Then he who rode first
of the three, and who wore a red cap and who seemed to be the chief of
them, walked solemnly up to a great rock that stood in the hillside,
and, breaking a switch from a shrub that grew in a cleft, struck the
face of the stone, crying in a loud voice, “I command thee to open, in
the name of the red Aldebaran!”

Instantly, creaking and groaning, the face of the rock opened like
a door, gaping blackly. Then, one after another, the three old men
entered, and nothing was left but the dull light of their torches,
shining on the walls of the passage-way.

What happened inside the cavern the fagot-maker could neither see nor
hear, but minute after minute passed while he sat as in a maze at all
that had happened. Then presently he heard a deep thundering voice and
a voice as of one of the old men in answer. Then there came a sound
swelling louder and louder, as though a great crowd of people were
gathering together, and with the voices came the noise of the neighing
of horses and the trampling of hoofs. Then at last there came pouring
from out the rock a great crowd of horses laden with bales and bundles
of rich stuffs and chests and caskets of gold and silver and jewels,
and each horse was led by a slave clad in a dress of cloth-of-gold,
sparkling and glistening with precious gems. When all these had come
out from the cavern, other horses followed, upon each of which sat
a beautiful damsel, more lovely than the fancy of man could picture.
Beside the damsels marched a guard, each man clad in silver armor, and
each bearing a drawn sword that flashed in the brightening day more
keenly than the lightning. So they all came pouring forth from the
cavern until it seemed as though the whole woods below were filled with
the wealth and the beauty of King Solomon’s day--and then, last of all,
came the three old men.

“In the name of the red Aldebaran,” said he who had bidden the rock to
open, “I command thee to become closed.” Again, creaking and groaning,
the rock shut as it had opened--like a door--and the three old men,
mounting their horses, led the way from the woods, the others following.
The noise and confusion of the many voices shouting and calling, the
trample and stamp of horses, grew fainter and fainter, until at last
all was once more hushed and still, and only the fagot-maker was left
behind, still staring like one dumb and bereft of wits.

But so soon as he was quite sure that all were really gone, he clambered
down as quickly as might be. He waited for a while to make doubly sure
that no one was left behind, and then he walked straight up to the rock,
just as he had seen the old man do. He plucked a switch from the bush,
just as he had seen the old man pluck one, and struck the stone, just
as the old man had struck it. “I command thee to open,” said he, “in the
name of the red Aldebaran!”

Instantly, as it had done in answer to the old man’s command, there came
a creaking and a groaning, and the rock slowly opened like a door, and
there was the passageway yawning before him. For a moment or two the
fagot-maker hesitated to enter; but all was as still as death, and
finally he plucked up courage and went within.

By this time the day was brightening and the sun rising, and by the gray
light the fagot-maker could see about him pretty clearly. Not a sign was
to be seen of horses or of treasure or of people--nothing but a square
block of marble, and upon it a black casket, and upon that again a gold
ring, in which was set a blood-red stone. Beyond these things there was
nothing; the walls were bare, the roof was bare, the floor was bare--all
was bare and naked stone.

“Well,” said the wood-chopper, “as the old men have taken everything
else, I might as well take these things. The ring is certainly worth
something, and maybe I shall be able to sell the casket for a trifle
into the bargain.” So he slipped the ring upon his finger, and, taking
up the casket, left the place. “I command thee to be closed,” said
he, “in the name of the red Aldebaran!” And thereupon the door closed,
creaking and groaning.

After a little while he found his ass, saddled it and bridled it, and
loaded it with the bundle of fagots that he had chopped the day before,
and then set off again to try to find his way out of the thick woods.
But still his luck was against him, and the farther he wandered the
deeper he found himself in the thickets. In the meantime he was like to
die of hunger, for he had not a bite to eat for more than a whole day.

“Perhaps,” said he to himself, “there may be something in the casket to
stay my stomach;” and, so saying, he sat him down, unlocked the casket,
and raised the lid.

Such a yell as the poor wretch uttered ears never heard before. Over
he rolled upon his back and there lay staring with wide eyes, and away
scampered the jackass, kicking up his heels and braying so that the
leaves of the trees trembled and shook. For no sooner had he lifted the
lid than out leaped a great hideous Genie, as black as a coal, with one
fiery-red eye in the middle of his forehead that glared and rolled most
horribly, and with his hands and feet set with claws, sharp and hooked
like the talons of a hawk. Poor Abdallah the fagot-maker lay upon his
back staring at the monster with a face as white as wax.

“What are thy commands?” said the Genie in a terrible voice, that
rumbled like the sound of thunder.

“I--I do not know,” said Abdallah, trembling and shaking as with an
ague. “I--I have forgotten.”

“Ask what thou wilt,” said the Genie, “for I must ever obey whomsoever
hast the ring that thou wearest upon thy finger. Hath my lord nothing to
command wherein I may serve him?”

Abdallah shook his head. “No,” said he, “there is
nothing--unless--unless you will bring me something to eat.”

“To hear is to obey,” said the Genie. “What will my lord be pleased to
have?”

“Just a little bread and cheese,” said Abdallah.

The Genie waved his hand, and in an instant a fine damask napkin lay
spread upon the ground, and upon it a loaf of bread as white as snow and
a piece of cheese such as the king would have been glad to taste. But
Abdallah could do nothing but sit staring at the Genie, for the sight of
the monster quite took away his appetite.

“What more can I do to serve thee?” asked the Genie.

“I think,” said Abdallah, “that I could eat more comfortably if you were
away.”

“To hear is to obey,” said the Genie. “Whither shall I go? Shall I enter
the casket again?”

“I do not know,” said the fagot-maker; “how did you come to be there?”

“I am a great Genie,” answered the monster, “and was conjured thither
by the great King Solomon, whose seal it is that thou wearest upon thy
finger. For a certain fault that I committed I was confined in the box
and hidden in the cavern where thou didst find me to-day. There I lay
for thousands of years until one day three old magicians discovered
the secret of where I lay hidden. It was they who only this morning
compelled me to give them that vast treasure which thou sawest them take
away from the cavern not long since.”

“But why did they not take you and the box and the ring away also?”
 asked Abdallah.

“Because,” answered the Genie, “they are three brothers, and neither two
care to trust the other one with such power as the ring has to give, so
they made a solemn compact among themselves that I should remain in the
cavern, and that no one of the three should visit it without the other
two in his company. Now, my lord, if it is thy will that I shall enter
the casket again I must even obey thy command in that as in all things;
but, if it please thee, I would fain rejoin my own kind again--they from
whom I have been parted for so long. Shouldst thou permit me to do so
I will still be thy slave, for thou hast only to press the red stone in
the ring and repeat these words: By the red Aldebaran, I command thee
to come,’ and I will be with thee instantly. But if I have my freedom
I shall serve thee from gratitude and love, and not from compulsion and
with fear.”

“So be it!” said Abdallah. “I have no choice in the matter, and thou
mayest go whither it pleases thee.”

No sooner had the words left his lips than the Genie gave a great cry
of rejoicing, so piercing that it made Abdallah’s flesh creep, and then,
fetching the black casket a kick that sent it flying over the tree tops,
vanished instantly.

“Well,” quote Abdallah, when he had caught his breath from his
amazement, “these are the most wonderful things that have happened to
me in all of my life.” And thereupon he fell to at the bread and cheese,
and ate as only a hungry man can eat. When he had finished the last
crumb he wiped his mouth with the napkin, and, stretching his arms, felt
within him that he was like a new man.

Nevertheless, he was still lost in the woods, and now not even with his
ass for comradeship.

He had wandered for quite a little while before he bethought himself of
the Genie. “What a fool am I,” said he, “not to have asked him to help
me while he was here.” He pressed his finger upon the ring, and cried in
a loud voice, “By the red Aldebaran, I command thee to come!”

Instantly the Genie stood before him--big, black, ugly, and grim. “What
are my lord’s commands?” said he.

“I command thee,” said Abdallah the fagot-maker, who was not half
so frightened at the sight of the monster this time as he had been
before--“I command thee to help me out of this woods.”

Hardly were the words out of his mouth when the Genie snatched Abdallah
up, and, flying swifter than the lightning, set him down in the middle
of the highway on the outskirts of the forest before he had fairly
caught his breath.

When he did gather his wits and looked about him, he knew very well
where he was, and that he was upon the road that led to the city. At the
sight his heart grew light within him, and off he stepped briskly for
home again.

But the sun shone hot and the way was warm and dusty, and before
Abdallah had gone very far the sweat was running down his face in
streams. After a while he met a rich husband-man riding easily along on
an ambling nag, and when Abdallah saw him he rapped his head with his
knuckles. “Why did I not think to ask the Genie for a horse?” said he.
“I might just as well have ridden as to have walked, and that upon
a horse a hundred times more beautiful than the one that that fellow
rides.”

He stepped into the thicket beside the way, where he might be out of
sight, and there pressed the stone in his ring, and at his bidding the
Genie stood before him.

“What are my lord’s commands?” said he.

“I would like to have a noble horse to ride upon,” said Abdallah--“a
horse such as a king might use.”

“To hear is to obey,” said the Genie; and, stretching out his hand,
there stood before Abdallah a magnificent Arab horse, with a saddle and
bridle studded with precious stones, and with housings of gold. “Can I
do aught to serve my lord further?” said the Genie.

“Not just now,” said Abdallah; “if I have further use for you I will
call you.”

The Genie bowed his head and was gone like a flash, and Abdallah mounted
his horse and rode off upon his way. But he had not gone far before
he drew rein suddenly. “How foolish must I look,” said he, “to be thus
riding along the high-road upon this noble steed, and I myself clad in
fagot-maker’s rags.” Thereupon he turned his horse into the thicket, and
again summoned the Genie. “I should like,” said he, “to have a suit of
clothes fit for a king to wear.”

“My lord shall have that which he desires,” said the Genie. He stretched
out his hand, and in an instant there lay across his arm raiment such
as the eyes of man never saw before--stiff with pearls, and blazing with
diamonds and rubies and emeralds and sapphires. The Genie himself aided
Abdallah to dress, and when he looked down he felt, for the time, quite
satisfied.

He rode a little farther. Then suddenly he bethought himself, “What a
silly spectacle shall I cut in the town with no money in my purse and
with such fine clothes upon my back.” Once more the Genie was summoned.
“I should like,” said the fagot-maker, “to have a box full of money.”

The Genie stretched out his hand, and in it was a casket of
mother-of-pearl inlaid with gold and full of money. “Has my lord any
further commands for his servant?” asked he.

“No,” answered Abdallah. “Stop--I have, too,” he added. “Yes; I would
like to have a young man to carry my money for me.”

“He is here,” said the Genie. And there stood a beautiful youth clad in
clothes of silver tissue, and holding a milk-white horse by the bridle.

“Stay, Genie,” said Abdallah. “Whilst thou art here thou mayest as
well give me enough at once to last me a long time to come. Let me have
eleven more caskets of money like this one, and eleven more slaves to
carry the same.”

“They are here,” said the Genie; and as he spoke there stood eleven more
youths before Abdallah, as like the first as so many pictures of the
same person, and each youth bore in his hands a box like the one that
the monster had given Abdallah. “Will my lord have anything further?”
 asked the Genie.

“Let me think,” said Abdallah. “Yes; I know the town well, and that
should one so rich as I ride into it without guards he would be certain
to be robbed before he had travelled a hundred paces. Let me have an
escort of a hundred armed men.”

“It shall be done,” said the Genie, and, waving his hand, the road where
they stood was instantly filled with armed men, with swords and helmets
gleaming and flashing in the sun, and all seated upon magnificently
caparisoned horses. “Can I serve my lord further?” asked the Genie.

“No,” said Abdallah the fagot-maker, in admiration, “I have nothing more
to wish for in this world. Thou mayest go, Genie, and it will be long
ere I will have to call thee again,” and thereupon the Genie was gone
like a flash.

The captain of Abdallah’s troop--a bearded warrior clad in a superb suit
of armor--rode up to the fagot-maker, and, leaping from his horse and
bowing before him so that his forehead touched the dust, said, “Whither
shall we ride, my lord?”

Abdallah smote his forehead with vexation. “If I live a thousand years,”
 said he, “I will never learn wisdom.” Thereupon, dismounting again, he
pressed the ring and summoned the Genie. “I was mistaken,” said he, “as
to not wanting thee so soon. I would have thee build me in the city a
magnificent palace, such as man never looked upon before, and let it be
full from top to bottom with rich stuffs and treasures of all sorts. And
let it have gardens and fountains and terraces fitting for such a place,
and let it be meetly served with slaves, both men and women, the most
beautiful that are to be found in all the world.”

“Is there aught else that thou wouldst have?” asked the Genie.

The fagot-maker meditated a long time. “I can bethink myself of nothing
more just now,” said he.

The Genie turned to the captain of the troop and said some words to him
in a strange tongue, and then in a moment was gone. The captain gave the
order to march, and away they all rode with Abdallah in the midst. “Who
would have thought,” said he, looking around him, with the heart within
him swelling with pride as though it would burst--“who would have
thought that only this morning I was a poor fagot-maker, lost in the
woods and half starved to death? Surely there is nothing left for me to
wish for in this world!”

Abdallah was talking of something he knew nothing of.

Never before was such a sight seen in that country, as Abdallah and
his troop rode through the gates and into the streets of the city.
But dazzling and beautiful as were those who rode attendant upon him,
Abdallah the fagot-maker surpassed them all as the moon dims the lustre
of the stars. The people crowded around shouting with wonder, and
Abdallah, in the fulness of his delight, gave orders to the slaves who
bore the caskets of money to open them and to throw the gold to the
people. So, with those in the streets scrambling and fighting for the
money and shouting and cheering, and others gazing down at the spectacle
from the windows and house-tops, the fagot-maker and his troop rode
slowly along through the town.

Now it chanced that their way led along past the royal palace, and the
princess, hearing all the shouting and the hubbub, looked over the edge
of the balcony and down into the street. At the same moment Abdallah
chanced to look up, and their eyes met. Thereupon the fagot-maker’s
heart crumbled away within him, for she was the most beautiful princess
in all the world. Her eyes were as black as night, her hair like threads
of fine silk, her neck like alabaster, and her lips and her cheeks as
soft and as red as rose-leaves. When she saw that Abdallah was looking
at her she dropped the curtain of the balcony and was gone, and the
fagot-maker rode away, sighing like a furnace.

So, by-and-by, he came to his palace, which was built all of marble
as white as snow, and which was surrounded with gardens, shaded by
flowering trees, and cooled by the plashing of fountains. From the
gateway to the door of the palace a carpet of cloth-of-gold had been
spread for him to walk upon, and crowds of slaves stood waiting to
receive him. But for all these glories Abdallah cared nothing; he hardly
looked about him, but, going straight to his room, pressed his ring and
summoned the Genie.

“What is it that my lord would have?” asked the monster.

“Oh, Genie!” said poor Abdallah, “I would have the princess for my wife,
for without her I am like to die.”

“My lord’s commands,” said the Genie, “shall be executed if I have to
tear down the city to do so. But perhaps this behest is not so hard to
fulfil. First of all, my lord will have to have an ambassador to send to
the king.”

“Very well,” said Abdallah with a sigh; “let me have an ambassador or
whatever may be necessary. Only make haste, Genie, in thy doings.”

“I shall lose no time,” said the Genie; and in a moment was gone.

The king was sitting in council with all of the greatest lords of the
land gathered about him, for the Emperor of India had declared war
against him, and he and they were in debate, discussing how the country
was to be saved. Just then Abdallah’s ambassador arrived, and when he
and his train entered the council-chamber all stood up to receive him,
for the least of those attendant upon him was more magnificently attired
than the king himself, and was bedecked with such jewels as the royal
treasury could not match.

Kneeling before the king, the ambassador touched the ground with his
forehead. Then, still kneeling, he unrolled a scroll, written in letters
of gold, and from it read the message asking for the princess to wife
for the Lord Abdallah.

When he had ended, the king sat for a while stroking his beard and
meditating. But before he spoke the oldest lord of the council arose and
said: “O sire! If this Lord Abdallah who asks for the princess for his
wife can send such a magnificent company in the train of his ambassador,
may it not be that he may be able also to help you in your war against
the Emperor of India?”

“True!” said the king. Then turning to the ambassador: “Tell your
master,” said he, “that if he will furnish me with an army of one
hundred thousand men, to aid me in the war against the Emperor of India,
he shall have my daughter for his wife.”

“Sire,” said the ambassador, “I will answer now for my master, and the
answer shall be this: That he will help you with an army, not of one
hundred thousand, but of two hundred thousand men. And if to-morrow you
will be pleased to ride forth to the plain that lieth to the south of
the city, my Lord Abdallah will meet you there with his army.” Then,
once more bowing, he withdrew from the council-chamber, leaving all them
that were there amazed at what had happened.

So the next day the king and all his court rode out to the place
appointed. As they drew near they saw that the whole face of the plain
was covered with a mighty host, drawn up in troops and squadrons. As the
king rode towards this vast army, Abdallah met him, surrounded by his
generals. He dismounted and would have kneeled, but the king would not
permit him, but, raising him, kissed him upon the cheek, calling him
son. Then the king and Abdallah rode down before the ranks and the whole
army waved their swords, and the flashing of the sunlight on the blades
was like lightning, and they shouted, and the noise was like the pealing
of thunder.

Before Abdallah marched off to the wars he and the princess were
married, and for a whole fortnight nothing was heard but the sound of
rejoicing. The city was illuminated from end to end, and all of the
fountains ran with wine instead of water. And of all those who rejoiced,
none was so happy as the princess, for never had she seen one whom
she thought so grand and noble and handsome as her husband. After the
fortnight had passed and gone, the army marched away to the wars with
Abdallah at its head.

Victory after victory followed, for in every engagement the Emperor of
India’s troops were driven from the field. In two months’ time the war
was over and Abdallah marched back again--the greatest general in the
world. But it was no longer as Abdallah that he was known, but as the
Emperor of India, for the former emperor had been killed in the war, and
Abdallah had set the crown upon his own head.

The little taste that he had had of conquest had given him an appetite
for more, so that with the armies the Genie provided him he conquered
all the neighboring countries and brought them under his rule. So he
became the greatest emperor in all the world; kings and princes kneeled
before him, and he, Abdallah, the fagot-maker, looking about him, could
say: “No one in all the world is so great as I!”

Could he desire anything more?

Yes; he did! He desired to be rid of the Genie!

When he thought of how all that he was in power and might--he, the
Emperor of the World--how all his riches and all his glory had come
as gifts from a hideous black monster with only one eye, his heart was
filled with bitterness. “I cannot forget,” said he to himself, “that
as he has given me all these things, he may take them all away again.
Suppose that I should lose my ring and that some one else should find
it; who knows but that they might become as great as I, and strip me
of everything, as I have stripped others. Yes; I wish he was out of the
way!”

Once, when such thoughts as these were passing through his mind, he was
paying a visit to his father-in-law, the king. He was walking up and
down the terrace of the garden meditating on these matters, when,
leaning over a wall and looking down into the street, he saw a
fagot-maker--just such a fagot-maker as he himself had one time
been--driving an ass--just such an ass as he had one time driven. The
fagot-maker carried something under his arm, and what should it be but
the very casket in which the Genie had once been imprisoned, and
which he--the one-time fagot-maker--had seen the Genie kick over the
tree-tops.

The sight of the casket put a sudden thought into his mind. He shouted
to his attendants, and bade them haste and bring the fagot-maker to
him. Off they ran, and in a little while came dragging the poor wretch,
trembling and as white as death; for he thought nothing less than that
his end had certainly come. As soon as those who had seized him had
loosened their hold, he flung himself prostrate at the feet of the
Emperor Abdallah, and there lay like one dead.

“Where didst thou get yonder casket?” asked the emperor.

“Oh, my lord!” croaked the poor fagot-maker, “I found it out yonder in
the woods.”

“Give it to me,” said the emperor, “and my treasurer shall count thee
out a thousand pieces of gold in exchange.”

So soon as he had the casket safe in his hands he hurried away to his
privy chamber, and there pressed the red stone in his ring. “In the
name of the red Aldebaran, I command thee to appear!” said he, and in a
moment the Genie stood before him.

“What are my lord’s commands?” said he.

“I would have thee enter this casket again,” said the Emperor Abdallah.

“Enter the casket!” cried the Genie, aghast.

“Enter the casket.”

“In what have I done anything to offend my lord?” said the Genie.

“In nothing,” said the emperor; “only I would have thee enter the casket
again as thou wert when I first found thee.”

It was in vain that the Genie begged and implored for mercy, it was in
vain that he reminded Abdallah of all that he had done to benefit him;
the great emperor stood as hard as a rock--into the casket the Genie
must and should go. So at last into the casket the monster went,
bellowing most lamentably.

The Emperor Abdallah shut the lid of the casket, and locked it and
sealed it with his seal. Then, hiding it under his cloak, he bore it out
into the garden and to a deep well, and, first making sure that nobody
was by to see, dropped casket and Genie and all into the water.

Now had that wise man been by--the wise man who had laughed so when
the poor young fagot-maker wept and wailed at the ingratitude of
his friend--the wise man who had laughed still louder when the young
fagot-maker vowed that in another case he would not have been so
ungrateful to one who had benefited him--how that wise man would have
roared when he heard the casket plump into the waters of the well! For,
upon my word of honor, betwixt Ali the fagot-maker and Abdallah the
Emperor of the World there was not a pin to choose, except in degree.


Old Ali Baba’s pipe had nearly gone out, and he fell a puffing at it
until the spark grew to life again, and until great clouds of smoke
rolled out around his head and up through the rafters above.

“I liked thy story, friend,” said old Bidpai--“I liked it mightily much.
I liked more especially the way in which thy emperor got rid of his
demon, or Genie.”

Fortunatus took a long pull at his mug of ale. “I know not,” said he,
“about the demon, but there was one part that I liked much, and that
was about the treasures of silver and gold and the palace that the Genie
built and all the fine things that the poor fagot-maker enjoyed.” Then
he who had once carried the magic purse in his pocket fell a clattering
with the bottom of his quart cup upon the table. “Hey! My pretty lass,”
 cried he, “come hither and fetch me another stoup of ale.”

Little Brown Betty came at his call, stumbling and tumbling into the
room, just as she had stumbled and tumbled in the Mother Goose book,
only this time she did not crack her crown, but gathered herself up
laughing.

“You may fill my canican while you are about it,” said St. George, “for,
by my faith, tis dry work telling a story.”

“And mine, too,” piped the little Tailor who killed seven flies at a
blow.

“And whose turn is it now to tell a story?” said Doctor Faustus.

“Tis his,” said the Lad who fiddled for the Jew, and he pointed to Hans
who traded and traded until he had traded his lump of gold for an empty
churn.

Hans grinned sheepishly. “Well,” said he, “I never did have luck at
anything, and why, then, d’ye think I should have luck at telling a
story?”

“Nay, never mind that,” said Aladdin, “tell thy story, friend, as best
thou mayst.”

“Very well,” said Hans, “if ye will have it, I will tell it to you; but,
after all, it is not better than my own story, and the poor man in the
end gets no more than I did in my bargains.”

“And what is your story about, my friend?” said Cinderella.

“Tis,” said Hans, “about how--”




Much shall have more and little shall have less.

Once upon a time there was a king who did the best he could to rule
wisely and well, and to deal justly by those under him whom he had to
take care of; and as he could not trust hearsay, he used every now and
then to slip away out of his palace and go among his people to hear what
they had to say for themselves about him and the way he ruled the land.

Well, one such day as this, when he was taking a walk, he strolled out
past the walls of the town and into the green fields until he came at
last to a fine big house that stood by the banks of a river, wherein
lived a man and his wife who were very well to do in the world. There
the king stopped for a bite of bread and a drink of fresh milk.

“I would like to ask you a question,” said the king to the rich man;
“and the question is this: Why are some folk rich and some folk poor?”

“That I cannot tell you,” said the good man; “only I remember my father
used to say that much shall have more and little shall have less.”

“Very well,” said the king; “the saying has a good sound, but let us
find whether or not it is really true. See; here is a purse with three
hundred pieces of golden money in it. Take it and give it to the poorest
man you know; in a week’s time I will come again, and then you shall
tell me whether it has made you or him the richer.”

Now in the town there lived two beggars who were as poor as poverty
itself, and the poorer of the twain was one who used to sit in rags and
tatters on the church step to beg charity of the good folk who came and
went. To him went the rich man, and, without so much as a good-morning,
quoth he: “Here is something for you,” and so saying dropped the purse
of gold into the beggar’s hat. Then away he went without waiting for a
word of thanks.

As for the beggar, he just sat there for a while goggling and staring
like one moon-struck. But at last his wits came back to him, and then
away he scampered home as fast as his legs could carry him. Then he
spread his money out on the table and counted it--three hundred pieces
of gold money! He had never seen such great riches in his life before.
There he sat feasting his eyes upon the treasure as though they would
never get their fill. And now what was he to do with all of it? Should
he share his fortune with his brother? Not a bit of it. To be sure,
until now they had always shared and shared alike, but here was the
first great lump of good-luck that had ever fallen in his way, and he
was not for spoiling it by cutting it in two to give half to a poor
beggar-man such as his brother. Not he; he would hide it and keep it all
for his very own.

Now, not far from where he lived, and beside the river, stood a
willow-tree, and thither the lucky beggar took his purse of money and
stuffed it into a knot-hole of a withered branch, then went his
way, certain that nobody would think of looking for money in such a
hiding-place. Then all the rest of the day he sat thinking and thinking
of the ways he would spend what had been given him, and what he would do
to get the most good out of it. At last came evening, and his brother,
who had been begging in another part of the town, came home again.

“I nearly lost my hat to-day,” said the second beggar so soon as he had
come into the house.

“Did you?” said the first beggar. “How was that?”

“Oh! The wind blew it off into the water, but I got it again.”

“How did you get it?” said the first beggar.

“I just broke a dead branch off of the willow-tree and drew my hat
ashore,” said the second beggar.

“A dead branch!!”

“A dead branch.”

“Off of the willow tree!!”

“Off of the willow tree.”

The first beggar could hardly breathe.

“And what did you do with the dead branch after that?”

“I threw it away into the water, and it floated down the river.”

The beggar to whom the money had been given ran out of the house
howling, and down to the river-side, thumping his head with his knuckles
like one possessed. For he knew that the branch his brother had broken
off of the tree and had thrown into the water, was the very one in which
he had hidden the bag of money.

Yes; and so it was.

The next morning, as the rich man took a walk down by the river, he saw
a dead branch that had been washed up by the tide. “Halloo!” says he,
“this will do to kindle the fire with.”

So he brought it to the house, and, taking down his axe, began to split
it up for kindling. The very first blow he gave, out tumbled the bag of
money.

But the beggar--well, by-and-by his grieving got better of its first
smart, and then he started off down the river to see if he could not
find his money again. He hunted up and he hunted down, but never a whit
of it did he see, and at last he stopped at the rich man’s house and
begged for a bite to eat and lodgings for the night. There he told all
his story--how he had hidden the money that had been given him from his
brother, how his brother had broken off the branch and had thrown it
away, and how he had spent the whole live-long day searching for it. And
to all the rich man listened and said never a word. But though he said
nothing, he thought to himself, “Maybe, after all, it is not the will of
Heaven that this man shall have the money. Nevertheless, I will give him
another trial.”

So he told the poor beggar to come in and stay for the night; and,
whilst the beggar was snoring away in his bed in the garret, the rich
man had his wife make two great pies, each with a fine brown crust. In
the first pie he put the little bag of money; the second he filled full
of rusty nails and scraps of iron.

The next morning he called the beggar to him. “My friend,” said he, “I
grieve sadly for the story you told me last night. But maybe, after all,
your luck is not all gone. And now, if you will choose as you should
choose, you shall not go away from here comfortless. In the pantry
yonder are two great pies--one is for you and one for me. Go in and take
whichever one you please.”

“A pie!” thought the beggar to himself; “does the man think that a big
pie will comfort me for the loss of three hundred pieces of money?”
 Nevertheless, as it was the best thing to be had, into the pantry the
beggar went and there began to feel and weigh the pies, and the one
filled with the rusty nails and scraps of iron was ever so much the
fatter and the heavier.

“This is the one that I shall take,” said he to the rich man, “and you
may have the other.” And, tucking it under his arm, off he tramped.

Well, before he got back to the town he grew hungry, and sat down by the
roadside to eat his pie; and if there was ever an angry man in the world
before, he was one that day--for there was his pie full of nothing but
rusty nails and bits of iron. “This is the way the rich always treat the
poor,” said he.

So back he went in a fume. “What did you give me a pie full of old nails
for?” said he.

“You took the pie of your own choice,” said the rich man; “nevertheless,
I meant you no harm. Lodge with me here one night, and in the morning I
will give you something better worth while, maybe.”

So that night the rich man had his wife bake two loaves of bread, in one
of which she hid the bag with the three hundred pieces of gold money.

“Go to the pantry,” said the rich man to the beggar in the morning, “and
there you will find two loaves of bread--one is for you and one for me;
take whichever one you choose.”

So in went the beggar, and the first loaf of bread he laid his hand upon
was the one in which the money was hidden, and off he marched with it
under his arm, without so much as saying thank you.

“I wonder,” said he to himself, after he had jogged along awhile--“I
wonder whether the rich man is up to another trick such as he played
upon me yesterday?” He put the loaf of bread to his ear and shook it and
shook it, and what should he hear but the chink of the money within. “Ah
ha!” said he, “he has filled it with rusty nails and bits of iron again,
but I will get the better of him this time.”

By-and-by he met a poor woman coming home from market. “Would you like
to buy a fine fresh loaf of bread?” said the beggar.

“Yes, I would,” said the woman.

“Well, here is one you may have for two pennies,” said the beggar.

That was cheap enough, so the woman paid him his price and off she went
with the loaf of bread under her arm, and never stopped until she had
come to her home.

Now it happened that the day before this very woman had borrowed just
such a loaf of bread from the rich man’s wife; and so, as there was
plenty in the house without it, she wrapped this loaf up in a napkin,
and sent her husband back with it to where it had started from first of
all.

“Well,” said the rich man to his wife, “the way of Heaven is not to be
changed.” And so he laid the money on the shelf until he who had given
it to him should come again, and thought no more of giving it to the
beggar.

At the end of seven days the king called upon the rich man again, and
this time he came in his own guise as a real king. “Well,” said he, “is
the poor man the richer for his money?”

“No,” said the rich man, “he is not;” and then he told the whole story
from beginning to end just as I have told it.

“Your father was right,” said the king; “and what he said was very
true--Much shall have more and little shall have less.’ Keep the bag of
money for yourself, for there Heaven means it to stay.”

And maybe there is as much truth as poetry in this story.


And now it was the turn of the Blacksmith who had made Death sit in his
pear-tree until the cold wind whistled through the ribs of man’s enemy.
He was a big, burly man, with a bullet head, and a great thick neck, and
a voice like a bull’s.

“Do you mind,” said he, “about how I clapped a man in the fire and
cooked him to a crisp that day that St. Peter came travelling my way?”

There was a little space of silence, and then the Soldier who had
cheated the Devil spoke up. “Why yes, friend,” said he, “I know your
story very well.”

“I am not so fortunate,” said old Bidpai. “I do not know your story.
Tell me, friend, did you really bake a man to a crisp? And how was it
then?”

“Why,” said the Blacksmith, “I was trying to do what a better man than
I did, and where he hit the mark I missed it by an ell. Twas a pretty
scrape I was in that day.”

“But how did it happen?” said Bidpai.

“It happened,” said the Blacksmith, “just as it is going to happen in
the story I am about to tell.”

“And what is your story about?” said Fortunatus.

“It is,” said the Blacksmith, “about--”




Wisdom’s Wages and Folly’s Pay

Once upon a time there was a wise man of wise men, and a great magician
to boot, and his name was Doctor Simon Agricola.

Once upon a time there was a simpleton of simpletons, and a great booby
to boot, and his name was Babo.

Simon Agricola had read all the books written by man, and could do more
magic than any conjurer that ever lived. But, nevertheless, he was
none too well off in the world; his clothes were patched, and his shoes
gaped, and that is the way with many another wise man of whom I have
heard tell.

Babo gathered rushes for a chair-maker, and he also had too few of the
good things to make life easy. But it is nothing out of the way for a
simpleton to be in that case.

The two of them lived neighbor to neighbor, the one in the next house
to the other, and so far as the world could see there was not a pin to
choose between them--only that one was called a wise man and the other a
simpleton.

One day the weather was cold, and when Babo came home from gathering
rushes he found no fire in the house. So off he went to his neighbor the
wise man. “Will you give me a live coal to start my fire?” said he.

“Yes, I will do that,” said Simon Agricola; “But how will you carry the
coal home?”

“Oh!” said Babo, “I will just take it in my hand.”

“In your hand?”

“In my hand.”

“Can you carry a live coal in your hand?”

“Oh yes!” said Babo; “I can do that easily enough.”

“Well, I should like to see you do it,” said Simon Agricola.

“Then I will show you,” said Babo. He spread a bed of cold, dead ashes
upon his palm. “Now,” said he, “I will take the ember upon that.”

Agricola rolled up his eyes like a duck in a thunder-storm. “Well,” said
he, “I have lived more than seventy years, and have read all the books
in the world; I have practised magic and necromancy, and know all about
algebra and geometry, and yet, wise as I am, I never thought of this
little thing.”

That is the way with your wise man.

“Pooh!” said Babo; “that is nothing. I know how to do many more tricks
than that.”

“Do you?” said Simon Agricola; “then listen: to-morrow I am going out
into the world to make my fortune, for little or nothing is to be had in
this town. If you will go along with me I will make your fortune also.”

“Very well,” said Babo, and the bargain was struck. So the next morning
bright and early off they started upon their journey, cheek by jowl, the
wise man and the simpleton, to make their fortunes in the wide world,
and the two of them made a pair. On they jogged and on they jogged,
and the way was none too smooth. By-and-by they came to a great field
covered all over with round stones.

“Let us each take one of these,” said Simon Agricola; “they will be of
use by-and-by;” and, as he spoke, he picked up a great stone as big as
his two fists, and dropped it into the pouch that dangled at his side.

“Not I,” said Babo; “I will carry no stone with me. It is as much as my
two legs can do to carry my body, let along lugging a great stone into
the bargain.”

“Very well,” said Agricola; “born a fool, live a fool, die a fool.’” And
on he tramped, with Babo at his heels.

At last they came to a great wide plain, where, far or near, nothing was
to be seen but bare sand, without so much as a pebble or a single blade
of grass, and there night caught up with them.

“Dear, dear, but I am hungry!” said Babo.

“So am I,” said Simon Agricola. “Let’s sit down here and eat.”

So down they sat, and Simon Agricola opened his pouch and drew forth the
stone.

The stone? It was a stone no longer, but a fine loaf of white bread as
big as your two fists. You should have seen Babo goggle and stare! “Give
me a piece of your bread, master,” said he.

“Not I,” said Agricola. “You might have had a dozen of the same kind,
had you chosen to do as I bade you and to fetch them along with you.
Born a fool, live a fool, die a fool,’” said he; and that was all that
Babo got for his supper. As for the wise man, he finished his loaf of
bread to the last crumb, and then went to sleep with a full stomach and
a contented mind.

The next morning off they started again bright and early, and before
long they came to just such another field of stones as they left behind
them the day before.

“Come, master,” said Babo, “let us each take a stone with us. We may
need something more to eat before the day is over.”

“No,” said Simon Agricola; “we will need no stones to-day.”

But Babo had no notion to go hungry the second time, so he hunted around
till he found a stone as big as his head. All day he carried it, first
under one arm, and then under the other. The wise man stepped along
briskly enough, but the sweat ran down Babo’s face like drops on the
window in an April shower. At last they came to a great wide plain,
where neither stock nor stone was to be seen, but only a gallows-tree,
upon which one poor wight hung dancing upon nothing at all, and there
night caught them again.

“Aha!” said Babo to himself. “This time I shall have bread and my master
none.”

But listen to what happened. Up stepped the wise man to the gallows, and
gave it a sharp rap with his staff. Then, lo and behold! The gallows was
gone, and in its place stood a fine inn, with lights in the windows, and
a landlord bowing and smiling in the doorway, and a fire roaring in
the kitchen, and the smell of good things cooking filling the air all
around, so that only to sniff did one’s heart good.

Poor Babo let fall the stone he had carried all day. A stone it was, and
a stone he let fall.

“Born a fool, live a fool, die a fool,’” said Agricola. “But come in,
Babo, come in; here is room enough for two.” So that night Babo had a
good supper and a sound sleep, and that is a cure for most of a body’s
troubles in this world.

The third day of their travelling they came to farms and villages, and
there Simon Agricola began to think of showing some of those tricks of
magic that were to make his fortune and Babo’s into the bargain.

At last they came to a blacksmith’s shop, and there was the smith hard
at work, dinging and donging, and making sweet music with hammer and
anvil. In walked Simon Agricola and gave him good-day. He put his
fingers into his purse, and brought out all the money he had in
the world; it was one golden angel. “Look, friend,” said he to the
blacksmith; “if you will let me have your forge for one hour, I will
give you this money for the use of it.”

The blacksmith liked the tune of that song very well. “You may have it,”
 said he; and he took off his leathern apron without another word, and
Simon Agricola put it on in his stead.

Presently, who should come riding up to the blacksmith’s shop but a rich
old nobleman and three servants. The servants were hale, stout fellows,
but the nobleman was as withered as a winter leaf. “Can you shoe my
horse?” said he to Simon Agricola, for he took him to be the smith
because of his leathern apron.

“No,” says Simon Agricola; “that is not my trade: I only know how to
make old people young.”

“Old people young!” said the old nobleman; “can you make me young
again?”

“Yes,” said Simon Agricola, “I can, but I must have a thousand golden
angels for doing it.”

“Very well,” said the old nobleman; “make me young, and you shall have
them and welcome.”

So Simon Agricola gave the word, and Babo blew the bellows until the
fire blazed and roared. Then the doctor caught the old nobleman, and
laid him upon the forge. He heaped the coals over him, and turned him
this way and that, until he grew red-hot, like a piece of iron. Then he
drew him forth from the fire and dipped him in the water-tank. Phizz!
The water hissed, and the steam rose up in a cloud; and when Simon
Agricola took the old nobleman out, lo and behold! He was as fresh and
blooming and lusty as a lad of twenty.

But you should have seen how all the people stared and goggled!--Babo
and the blacksmith and the nobleman’s servants. The nobleman strutted up
and down for a while, admiring himself, and then he got upon his
horse again. “But wait,” said Simon Agricola; “you forgot to pay me my
thousand golden angels.”

“Pooh!” said the nobleman, and off he clattered, with his servants at
his heels; and that was all the good that Simon Agricola had of this
trick. But ill-luck was not done with him yet, for when the smith saw
how matters had turned out, he laid hold of the doctor and would not let
him go until he had paid him the golden angel he had promised for the
use of the forge. The doctor pulled a sour face, but all the same he
had to pay the angel. Then the smith let him go, and off he marched in a
huff.

Outside of the forge was the smith’s mother--a poor old creature,
withered and twisted and bent as a winter twig. Babo had kept his eyes
open, and had not travelled with Simon Agricola for nothing. He plucked
the smith by the sleeve: “Look’ee, friend,” said he, “how would you like
me to make your mother, over yonder, young again?”

“I should like nothing better,” said the smith.

“Very well,” said Babo; “give me the golden angel that the master gave
you, and I’ll do the job for you.”

Well, the smith paid the money, and Babo bade him blow the bellows. When
the fire roared up good and hot, he caught up the old mother, and, in
spite of her scratching and squalling, he laid her upon the embers.
By-and-by, when he thought the right time had come, he took her out and
dipped her in the tank of water; but instead of turning young, there she
lay, as dumb as a fish and as black as coal.

When the blacksmith saw what Babo had done to his mother, he caught him
by the collar, and fell to giving him such a dressing down as never man
had before.

“Help!” bawled Babo. “Help! Murder!”

Such a hubbub had not been heard in that town for many a day. Back came
Simon Agricola running, and there he saw, and took it all in in one
look.

“Stop, friend,” said he to the smith, “let the simpleton go; this is not
past mending yet.”

“Very well,” said the smith; “but he must give me back my golden angel,
and you must cure my mother, or else I’ll have you both up before the
judge.”

“It shall be done,” said Simon Agricola; so Babo paid back the money,
and the doctor dipped the woman in the water. When he brought her out
she was as well and strong as ever--but just as old as she had been
before.

“Now be off for a pair of scamps, both of you,” said the blacksmith;
“and if you ever come this way again, I’ll set all the dogs in the town
upon you.”

Simon Agricola said nothing until they had come out upon the highway
again, and left the town well behind them; then--“Born a fool, live a
fool, die a fool!” says he.

Babo said nothing, but he rubbed the places where the smith had dusted
his coat.

The fourth day of their journey they came to a town, and here Simon
Agricola was for trying his tricks of magic again. He and Babo took
up their stand in the corner of the market-place, and began bawling,
“Doctor Knowall! Doctor Knowall! Who has come from the other end of
Nowhere! He can cure any sickness or pain! He can bring you back from
the gates of death! Here is Doctor Knowall! Here is Doctor Knowall!”

Now there was a very, very rich man in that town, whose daughter lay
sick to death; and when the news of this great doctor was brought to his
ears, he was for having him try his hand at curing the girl.

“Very well,” said Simon Agricola, “I will do that, but you must pay me
two thousand golden angels.”

“Two thousand golden angels!” said the rich man; “that is a great deal
of money, but you shall have it if only you will cure my daughter.”

Simon Agricola drew a little vial from his bosom. From it he poured
just six drops of yellow liquor upon the girl’s tongue. Then--lo and
behold!--up she sat in bed as well and strong as ever, and asked for a
boiled chicken and a dumpling, by way of something to eat.

“Bless you! Bless you!” said the rich man.

“Yes, yes; blessings are very good, but I would like to have my two
thousand golden angels,” said Simon Agricola.

“Two thousand golden angels! I said nothing about two thousand golden
angels,” said the rich man; “two thousand fiddlesticks!” said he. “Pooh!
Pooh! You must have been dreaming! See, here are two hundred silver
pennies, and that is enough and more than enough for six drops of
medicine.”

“I want my two thousand golden angels,” said Simon Agricola.

“You will get nothing but two hundred pennies,” said the rich man.

“I won’t touch one of them,” said Simon Agricola, and off he marched in
a huff.

But Babo had kept his eyes open. Simon Agricola had laid down the vial
upon the table, and while they were saying this and that back and forth,
thinking of nothing else, Babo quietly slipped it into his own pocket,
without any one but himself being the wiser.

Down the stairs stumped the doctor with Babo at his heels. There stood
the cook waiting for them.

“Look,” said he, “my wife is sick in there; won’t you cure her, too?”

“Pooh!” said Simon Agricola; and out he went, banging the door behind
him.

“Look, friend,” said Babo to the cook, “here I have some of the same
medicine. Give me the two hundred pennies that the master would not
take, and I’ll cure her for you as sound as a bottle.”

“Very well,” said the cook, and he counted out the two hundred pennies,
and Babo slipped them into his pocket. He bade the woman open her mouth,
and when she had done so he poured all the stuff down her throat at
once.

“Ugh!” said she, and therewith rolled up her eyes, and lay as stiff and
dumb as a herring in a box.

When the cook saw what Babo had done, he snatched up the rolling-pin and
made at him to pound his head to a jelly. But Babo did not wait for his
coming; he jumped out of the window, and away he scampered with the cook
at his heels.

Well, the upshot of the business was that Simon Agricola had to go back
and bring life to the woman again, or the cook would thump him and Babo
both with the rolling-pin. And, what was more, Babo had to pay back the
two hundred pennies that the cook had given him for curing his wife.

The wise man made a cross upon the woman’s forehead, and up she sat, as
well--but no better--as before.

“And now be off,” said the cook, “or I will call the servants and give
you both a drubbing for a pair of scamps.”

Simon Agricola said never a word until they had gotten out of the town.
There his anger boiled over, like water into the fire. “Look,” said he
to Babo: “Born a fool, live a fool, die a fool.’ I want no more of you.
Here are two roads; you take one, and I will take the other.”

“What!” said Babo, “am I to travel the rest of the way alone? And then,
besides, how about the fortune you promised me?”

“Never mind that,” said Simon Agricola; “I have not made my own fortune
yet.”

“Well, at least pay me something for my wages,” said Babo.

“How shall I pay you?” said Simon Agricola. “I have not a single groat
in the world.”

“What!” said Babo, “have you nothing to give me?”

“I can give you a piece of advice.”

“Well,” said Babo, “that is better than nothing, so let me have it.”

“Here it is,” said Simon Agricola: “Think well! Think well!--before you
do what you are about to do, think well!’”

“Thank you!” said Babo; and then the one went one way, and the other the
other.

(You may go with the wise man if you choose, but I shall jog along with
the simpleton.)

After Babo had travelled for a while, he knew not whither, night caught
him, and he lay down under a hedge to sleep. There he lay, and snored
away like a saw-mill, for he was wearied with his long journeying.

Now it chanced that that same night two thieves had broken into a
miser’s house, and had stolen an iron pot full of gold money. Day broke
before they reached home, so down they sat to consider the matter; and
the place where they seated themselves was on the other side of the
hedge where Babo lay. The older thief was for carrying the money home
under his coat; the younger was for burying it until night had come
again. They squabbled and bickered and argued till the noise they made
wakened Babo, and he sat up. The first thing he thought of was the
advice that the doctor had given him the evening before.

“Think well!’” he bawled out; “think well! before you do what you are
about to do, think well!’”

When the two thieves heard Babo’s piece of advice, they thought that the
judge’s officers were after them for sure and certain. Down they dropped
the pot of money, and away they scampered as fast as their legs could
carry them.

Babo heard them running, and poked his head through the hedge, and there
lay the pot of gold. “Look now,” said he: “this has come from the advice
that was given me; no one ever gave me advice that was worth so much
before.” So he picked up the pot of gold, and off he marched with it.

He had not gone far before he met two of the king’s officers, and you
may guess how they opened their eyes when they saw him travelling along
the highway with a pot full of gold money.

“Where are you going with that money?” said they.

“I don’t know,” said Babo.

“How did you get it?” said they.

“I got it for a piece of advice,” said Babo.

For a piece of advice! No, no--the king’s officers knew butter from
lard, and truth from t’other thing. It was just the same in that country
as it is in our town--there was nothing in the world so cheap as advice.
Whoever heard of anybody giving a pot of gold and silver money for it?
Without another word they marched Babo and his pot of money off to the
king.

“Come,” said the king, “tell me truly; where did you get the pot of
money?”

Poor Babo began to whimper. “I got it for a piece of advice,” said he.

“Really and truly?” said the king.

“Yes,” said Babo; “really and truly.”

“Humph!” said the king. “I should like to have advice that is worth as
much as that. Now, how much will you sell your advice to me for?”

“How much will you give?” said Babo.

“Well,” said the king, “let me have it for a day on trial, and at the
end of that time I will pay you what it is worth.”

“Very well,” said Babo, “that is a bargain;” and so he lent the king his
piece of advice for one day on trial.

Now the chief councillor and some others had laid a plot against the
king’s life, and that morning it had been settled that when the barber
shaved him he was to cut his throat with a razor. So after the barber
had lathered his face he began to whet the razor, and to whet the razor.

Just at that moment the king remembered Babo’s piece of advice. “Think
well!” said he; “think well! Before you do what you are about to do,
think well!”

When the barber heard the words that the king said, he thought that
all had been discovered. Down he fell upon his knees, and confessed
everything.

That is how Babo’s advice saved the king’s life--you can guess whether
the king thought it was worth much or little. When Babo came the next
morning the king gave him ten chests full of money, and that made the
simpleton richer than anybody in all that land.

He built himself a fine house, and by-and-by married the daughter of the
new councillor that came after the other one’s head had been chopped off
for conspiring against the king’s life. Besides that, he came and went
about the king’s castle as he pleased, and the king made much of him.
Everybody bowed to him, and all were glad to stop and chat awhile with
him when they met him in the street.

One morning Babo looked out of the window, and who should he see come
travelling along the road but Simon Agricola himself, and he was just as
poor and dusty and travel-stained as ever.

“Come in, come in!” said Babo; and you can guess how the wise man stared
when he saw the simpleton living in such a fine way. But he opened his
eyes wider than ever when he heard that all these good things came from
the piece of advice he had given Babo that day they had parted at the
cross roads.

“Aye, aye!” said he, “the luck is with you for sure and certain. But
if you will pay me a thousand golden angels, I will give you something
better than a piece of advice. I will teach you all the magic that is to
be learned from the books.”

“No,” said Babo, “I am satisfied with the advice.”

“Very well,” said Simon Agricola, “Born a fool, live a fool, die a
fool’;” and off he went in a huff.

That is all of this tale except the tip end of it, and that I will give
you now.

I have heard tell that one day the king dropped in the street the piece
of advice that he had bought from Babo, and that before he found it
again it had been trampled into the mud and dirt. I cannot say for
certain that this is the truth, but it must have been spoiled in some
way or other, for I have never heard of anybody in these days who would
give even so much as a bad penny for it; and yet it is worth just as
much now as it was when Babo sold it to the king.


I had sat listening to these jolly folk for all this time, and I had not
heard old Sindbad say a word, and yet I knew very well he was full of
a story, for every now and then I could see his lips move, and he would
smile, and anon he would stroke his long white beard and smile again.

Everybody clapped their hands and rattled their canicans after the
Blacksmith had ended his story, and methought they liked it better
than almost anything that had been told. Then there was a pause, and
everybody was still, and as nobody else spoke I myself ventured to break
the silence. “I would like,” said I (and my voice sounded thin in my own
ears, as one’s voice always does sound in Twilight Land), “I would like
to hear our friend Sindbad the Sailor tell a story. Methinks one is
fermenting in his mind.”

Old Sindbad smiled until his cheeks crinkled into wrinkles.

“Aye,” said every one, “will you not tell a story?”

“To be sure I will,” said Sindbad. “I will tell you a good story,” said
he, “and it is about--”




The Enchanted Island.

But it is not always the lucky one that carries away the plums;
sometimes he only shakes the tree, and the wise man pockets the fruit.

Once upon a long, long time ago, and in a country far, far away, there
lived two men in the same town and both were named Selim; one was Selim
the Baker and one was Selim the Fisherman.

Selim the Baker was well off in the world, but Selim the Fisherman was
only so-so. Selim the Baker always had plenty to eat and a warm corner
in cold weather, but many and many a time Selim the Fisherman’s stomach
went empty and his teeth went chattering.

Once it happened that for time after time Selim the Fisherman caught
nothing but bad luck in his nets, and not so much as a single sprat,
and he was very hungry. “Come,” said he to himself, “those who have some
should surely give to those who have none,” and so he went to Selim the
Baker. “Let me have a loaf of bread,” said he, “and I will pay you for
it tomorrow.”

“Very well,” said Selim the Baker; “I will let you have a loaf of bread,
if you will give me all that you catch in your nets to-morrow.”

“So be it,” said Selim the Fisherman, for need drives one to hard
bargains sometimes; and therewith he got his loaf of bread.

So the next day Selim the Fisherman fished and fished and fished and
fished, and still he caught no more than the day before; until just
at sunset he cast his net for the last time for the day, and, lo and
behold! There was something heavy in it. So he dragged it ashore, and
what should it be but a leaden box, sealed as tight as wax, and covered
with all manner of strange letters and figures. “Here,” said he, “is
something to pay for my bread of yesterday, at any rate;” and as he was
an honest man, off he marched with it to Selim the Baker.

They opened the box in the baker’s shop, and within they found two rolls
of yellow linen. In each of the rolls of linen was another little leaden
box: in one was a finger-ring of gold set with a red stone, in the other
was a finger-ring of iron set with nothing at all.

That was all the box held; nevertheless, that was the greatest catch
that ever any fisherman made in the world; for, though Selim the one or
Selim the other knew no more of the matter than the cat under the stove,
the gold ring was the Ring of Luck and the iron ring was the Ring of
Wisdom.

Inside of the gold ring were carved these letters: “Whosoever wears me,
shall have that which all men seek--for so it is with good-luck in this
world.”

Inside of the iron ring were written these words: “Whosoever wears me,
shall have that which few men care for--and that is the way it is with
wisdom in our town.”

“Well,” said Selim the Baker, and he slipped the gold ring of good-luck
on his finger, “I have driven a good bargain, and you have paid for your
loaf of bread.”

“But what will you do with the other ring?” said Selim the Fisherman.

“Oh, you may have that,” said Selim the Baker.

Well, that evening, as Selim the Baker sat in front of his shop in the
twilight smoking a pipe of tobacco, the ring he wore began to work. Up
came a little old man with a white beard, and he was dressed all in gray
from top to toe, and he wore a black velvet cap, and he carried a long
staff in his hand. He stopped in front of Selim the Baker, and stood
looking at him a long, long time. At last--“Is your name Selim?” said
he.

“Yes,” said Selim the Baker, “it is.”

“And do you wear a gold ring with a red stone on your finger?”

“Yes,” said Selim, “I do.”

“Then come with me,” said the little old man, “and I will show you the
wonder of the world.”

“Well,” said Selim the Baker, “that will be worth the seeing, at any
rate.” So he emptied out his pipe of tobacco, and put on his hat and
followed the way the old man led.

Up one street they went, and down another, and here and there through
alleys and byways where Selim had never been before. At last they came
to where a high wall ran along the narrow street, with a garden behind
it, and by-and-by to an iron gate. The old man rapped upon the gate
three times with his knuckles, and cried in a loud voice, “Open to
Selim, who wears the Ring of Luck!”

Then instantly the gate swung open, and Selim the Baker followed the old
man into the garden.

Bang! shut the gate behind him, and there he was.

There he was! And such a place he had never seen before. Such fruit!
Such flowers! Such fountains! Such summer-houses!

“This is nothing,” said the old man; “this is only the beginning of
wonder. Come with me.”

He led the way down a long pathway between the trees, and Selim
followed. By-and-by, far away, they saw the light of torches; and when
they came to what they saw, lo and behold! there was the sea-shore, and
a boat with four-and-twenty oarsmen, each dressed in cloth of gold and
silver more splendidly than a prince. And there were four-and-twenty
black slaves, carrying each a torch of spice-wood, so that all the
air was filled with sweet smells. The old man led the way, and Selim,
following, entered the boat; and there was a seat for him made soft with
satin cushions embroidered with gold and precious stones and stuffed
with down, and Selim wondered whether he was not dreaming.

The oarsmen pushed off from the shore and away they rowed.

On they rowed and on they rowed for all that livelong night.

At last morning broke, and then as the sun rose Selim saw such a sight
as never mortal eyes beheld before or since. It was the wonder of
wonders--a great city built on an island. The island was all one
mountain; and on it, one above another and another above that again,
stood palaces that glistened like snow, and orchards of fruit, and
gardens of flowers and green trees.

And as the boat came nearer and nearer to the city, Selim could see that
all around on the house-tops and down to the water’s edge were crowds
and crowds of people. All were looking out towards the sea, and when
they saw the boat and Selim in it, a great shout went up like the
roaring of rushing waters.

“It is the King!” they cried--“it is the King! It is Selim the King!”

Then the boat landed, and there stood dozens of scores of great princes
and nobles to welcome Selim when he came ashore. And there was a white
horse waiting for him to ride, and its saddle and bridle were studded
with diamonds and rubies and emeralds that sparkled and glistened like
the stars in heaven, and Selim thought for sure he must be dreaming with
his eyes open.

But he was not dreaming, for it was all as true as that eggs are eggs.
So up the hill he rode, and to the grandest and the most splendid of all
the splendid palaces, the princes and noblemen riding with him, and the
crowd shouting as though to split their throats.

And what a palace it was!--as white as snow and painted all inside
with gold and blue. All around it were gardens blooming with fruit and
flowers, and the like of it mortal man never saw in the world before.

There they made a king of Selim, and put a golden crown on his head; and
that is what the Ring of Good Luck can do for a baker.

But wait a bit! There was something queer about it all, and that is now
to be told.

All that day was feasting and drinking and merry-making, and the
twinging and twanging of music, and dancing of beautiful dancing-girls,
and such things as Selim had never heard tell of in all his life before.
And when night came they lit thousands and thousands of candles of
perfumed wax; so that it was a hard matter to say when night began and
day ended, only that the one smelled sweeter than the other.

But at last it came midnight, and then suddenly, in an instant, all the
lights went out and everything was as dark as pitch--not a spark, not
a glimmer anywhere. And, just as suddenly, all the sound of music and
dancing and merrymaking ceased, and everybody began to wail and cry
until it was enough to wring one’s heart to hear. Then, in the midst of
all the wailing and crying, a door was flung open, and in came six tall
and terrible black men, dressed all in black from top to toe, carrying
each a flaming torch; and by the light of the torches King Selim saw
that all--the princes, the noblemen, the dancing-girls--all lay on their
faces on the floor.

The six men took King Selim--who shuddered and shook with fear--by the
arms, and marched him through dark, gloomy entries and passage-ways,
until they came at last to the very heart of the palace.

There was a great high-vaulted room all of black marble, and in the
middle of it was a pedestal with seven steps, all of black marble; and
on the pedestal stood a stone statue of a woman looking as natural as
life, only that her eyes were shut. The statue was dressed like a queen:
she wore a golden crown on her head, and upon her body hung golden
robes, set with diamonds and emeralds and rubies and sapphires and
pearls and all sorts of precious stones.

As for the face of the statue, white paper and black ink could not tell
you how beautiful it was. When Selim looked at it, it made his heart
stand still in his breast, it was so beautiful.

The six men brought Selim up in front of the statue, and then a voice
came as though from the vaulted roof: “Selim! Selim! Selim!” it said,
“what are thou doing? To-day is feasting and drinking and merry-making,
but beware of tomorrow!”

As soon as these words were ended the six black men marched King Selim
back whence they had brought him; there they left him and passed out one
by one as they had first come in, and the door shut to behind them.

Then in an instant the lights flashed out again, the music began to
play and the people began to talk and laugh, and King Selim thought that
maybe all that had just passed was only a bit of an ugly dream after
all.

So that is the way King Selim the Baker began to reign, and that is the
way he continued to reign. All day was feasting and drinking and making
merry and music and laughing and talking. But every night at midnight
the same thing happened: the lights went out, all the people began
wailing and crying, and the six tall, terrible black men came with
flashing torches and marched King Selim away to the beautiful statue.
And every night the same voice said--“Selim! Selim! Selim! What art thou
doing! To-day is feasting and drinking and merry-making; but beware of
tomorrow!”

So things went on for a twelvemonth, and at last came the end of the
year. That day and night the merry-making was merrier and wilder and
madder than it had ever been before, but the great clock in the tower
went on--tick, tock! tick, tock!--and by and by it came midnight. Then,
as it always happened before, the lights went out, and all was as
black as ink. But this time there was no wailing and crying out, but
everything was silent as death; the door opened slowly, and in came, not
six black men as before, but nine men as silent as death, dressed all in
flaming red, and the torches they carried burned as red as blood. They
took King Selim by the arms, just as the six men had done, and marched
him through the same entries and passageways, and so came at last to
the same vaulted room. There stood the statue, but now it was turned to
flesh and blood, and the eyes were open and looking straight at Selim
the Baker.

“Art thou Selim?” said she; and she pointed her finger straight at him.

“Yes, I am Selim,” said he.

“And dost thou wear the gold ring with the red stone?” said she.

“Yes,” said he; “I have it on my finger.”

“And dost thou wear the iron ring?”

“No,” said he; “I gave that to Selim the Fisherman.”

The words had hardly left his lips when the statue gave a great cry and
clapped her hands together. In an instant an echoing cry sounded all
over the town--a shriek fit to split the ears.

The next moment there came another sound--a sound like thunder--above
and below and everywhere. The earth began to shake and to rock, and the
houses began to topple and fall, and the people began to scream and to
yell and to shout, and the waters of the sea began to lash and to roar,
and the wind began to bellow and howl. Then it was a good thing for King
Selim that he wore Luck’s Ring; for, though all the beautiful snow-white
palace about him and above him began to crumble to pieces like slaked
lime, the sticks and the stones and the beams to fall this side of him
and that, he crawled out from under it without a scratch or a bruise,
like a rat out of a cellar.

That is what Luck’s Ring did for him.

But his troubles were not over yet; for, just as he came out from under
all the ruin, the island began to sink down into the water, carrying
everything along with it--that is, everything but him and one thing
else. That one other thing was an empty boat, and King Selim climbed
into it, and nothing else saved him from drowning. It was Luck’s Ring
that did that for him also.

The boat floated on and on until it came to another island that was just
like the island he had left, only that there was neither tree nor blade
of grass nor hide nor hair nor living thing of any kind. Nevertheless,
it was an island just like the other: a high mountain and nothing else.
There Selim the Baker went ashore, and there he would have starved to
death only for Luck’s Ring; for one day a boat came sailing by, and when
poor Selim shouted, those aboard heard him and came and took him off.
How they all stared to see his golden crown--for he still wore it--and
his robes of silk and satin and the gold and jewels!

Before they would consent to carry him away, they made him give up all
the fine things he had. Then they took him home again to the town whence
he had first come, just as poor as when he had started. Back he went to
his bake-shop and his ovens, and the first thing he did was to take off
his gold ring and put it on the shelf.

“If that is the ring of good luck,” said he, “I do not want to wear the
like of it.”

That is the way with mortal man: for one has to have the Ring of Wisdom
as well, to turn the Ring of Luck to good account.

And now for Selim the Fisherman.

Well, thus it happened to him. For a while he carried the iron ring
around in his pocket--just as so many of us do--without thinking to put
it on. But one day he slipped it on his finger--and that is what we do
not all of us do. After that he never took it off again, and the world
went smoothly with him. He was not rich, but then he was not poor; he
was not merry, neither was he sad. He always had enough and was thankful
for it, for I never yet knew wisdom to go begging or crying.

So he went his way and he fished his fish, and twelve months and a week
or more passed by. Then one day he went past the baker shop and there
sat Selim the Baker smoking his pipe of tobacco.

“So, friend,” said Selim the Fisherman, “you are back again in the old
place, I see.”

“Yes,” said the other Selim; “awhile ago I was a king, and now I
am nothing but a baker again. As for that gold ring with the red
stone--they may say it is Luck’s Ring if they choose, but when next I
wear it may I be hanged.”

Thereupon he told Selim the Fisherman the story of what had happened to
him with all its ins and outs, just as I have told it to you.

“Well!” said Selim the Fisherman, “I should like to have a sight of that
island myself. If you want the ring no longer, just let me have it; for
maybe if I wear it something of the kind will happen to me.”

“You may have it,” said Selim the Baker. “Yonder it is, and you are
welcome to it.”

So Selim the Fisherman put on the ring, and then went his way about his
own business.

That night, as he came home carrying his nets over his shoulder, whom
should he meet but the little old man in gray, with the white beard and
the black cap on his head and the long staff in his hand.

“Is your name Selim?” said the little man, just as he had done to Selim
the Baker.

“Yes,” said Selim; “it is.”

“And do you wear a gold ring with a red stone?” said the little old man,
just as he had said before.

“Yes,” said Selim; “I do.”

“Then come with me,” said the little old man, “and I will show you the
wonder of the world.”

Selim the Fisherman remembered all that Selim the Baker had told him,
and he took no two thoughts as to what to do. Down he tumbled his nets,
and away he went after the other as fast as his legs could carry him.
Here they went and there they went, up crooked streets and lanes and
down by-ways and alley-ways, until at last they came to the same garden
to which Selim the Baker had been brought. Then the old man knocked at
the gate three times and cried out in a loud voice, “Open! Open! Open to
Selim who wears the Ring of Luck!”

Then the gate opened, and in they went. Fine as it all was, Selim
the Fisherman cared to look neither to the right nor to the left, but
straight after the old man he went, until at last they came to the
seaside and the boat and the four-and-twenty oarsmen dressed like
princes and the black slaves with the perfumed torches.

Here the old man entered the boat and Selim after him, and away they
sailed.

To make a long story short, everything happened to Selim the Fisherman
just as it had happened to Selim the Baker. At dawn of day they came to
the island and the city built on the mountain. And the palaces were just
as white and beautiful, and the gardens and orchards just as fresh and
blooming as though they had not all tumbled down and sunk under the
water a week before, almost carrying poor Selim the Baker with them.
There were the people dressed in silks and satins and jewels, just as
Selim the Baker had found them, and they shouted and hurrahed for Selim
the Fisherman just as they had shouted and hurrahed for the other.
There were the princes and the nobles and the white horse, and Selim the
Fisherman got on his back and rode up to a dazzling snow-white palace,
and they put a crown on his head and made a king of him, just as they
had made a king of Selim the Baker.

That night, at midnight, it happened just as it had happened before.
Suddenly, as the hour struck, the lights all went out, and there was a
moaning and a crying enough to make the heart curdle. Then the door
flew open, and in came the six terrible black men with torches. They
led Selim the Fisherman through damp and dismal entries and passage-ways
until they came to the vaulted room of black marble, and there stood
the beautiful statue on its black pedestal. Then came the voice from
above--“Selim! Selim! Selim!” it cried, “what art thou doing? To-day is
feasting and drinking and merry-making, but beware of to-morrow!”

But Selim the Fisherman did not stand still and listen, as Selim the
Baker had done. He called out, “I hear the words! I am listening! I will
beware to-day for the sake of to-morrow!”

I do not know what I should have done had I been king of that island and
had I known that in a twelve-month it would all come tumbling down about
my ears and sink into the sea, maybe carry me along with it. This is
what Selim the Fisherman did [but then he wore the iron Ring of Wisdom
on his finger, and I never had that upon mine]:

First of all, he called the wisest men of the island to him, and found
from them just where the other desert island lay upon which the boat
with Selim the Baker in it had drifted.

Then, when he had learned where it was to be found, he sent armies and
armies of men and built on that island palaces and houses, and planted
there orchards and gardens, just like the palaces and the orchards and
the gardens about him--only a great deal finer. Then he sent fleets and
fleets of ships, and carried everything away from the island where he
lived to that other island--all the men and the women and the children;
all the flocks and herds and every living thing; all the fowls and the
birds and everything that wore feathers; all the gold and the silver and
the jewels and the silks and the satins, and whatever was of any good
or of any use; and when all these things were done, there were still two
days left till the end of the year.

Upon the first of these two days he sent over the beautiful statue and
had it set up in the very midst of the splendid new palace he had built.

Upon the second day he went over himself, leaving behind him nothing but
the dead mountain and the rocks and the empty houses.

So came the end of the twelve months.

So came midnight.

Out went all the lights in the new palace, and everything was as silent
as death and as black as ink. The door opened, and in came the nine
men in red, with torches burning as red as blood. They took Selim the
Fisherman by the arms and led him to the beautiful statue, and there she
was with her eyes open.

“Are you Selim?” said she.

“Yes, I am Selim,” said he.

“And do you wear the iron Ring of Wisdom?” said she.

“Yes, I do,” said he; and so he did.

There was no roaring and thundering, there was no shaking and quaking,
there was no toppling and tumbling, there was no splashing and dashing:
for this island was solid rock, and was not all enchantment and hollow
inside and underneath like the other which he had left behind.

The beautiful statue smiled until the place lit up as though the sun
shone. Down she came from the pedestal where she stood and kissed Selim
the Fisherman on the lips.

Then instantly the lights blazed everywhere, and the people shouted and
cheered, and the music played. But neither Selim the Fisherman nor the
beautiful statue saw or heard anything.

“I have done all this for you!” said Selim the Fisherman.

“And I have been waiting for you a thousand years!” said the beautiful
statue--only she was not a statue any longer.

After that they were married, and Selim the Fisherman and the enchanted
statue became king and queen in real earnest.

I think Selim the Fisherman sent for Selim the Baker and made him rich
and happy--I hope he did--I am sure he did.

So, after all, it is not always the lucky one who gathers the plums when
wisdom is by to pick up what the other shakes down.


I could say more; for, O little children! little children! there is
more than meat in many an egg-shell; and many a fool tells a story that
joggles a wise man’s wits, and many a man dances and junkets in his
fool’s paradise till it comes tumbling down about his ears some day; and
there are few men who are like Selim the Fisherman, who wear the Ring of
Wisdom on their finger, and, alack-a-day! I am not one of them, and that
is the end of this story.


Old Bidpai nodded his head. “Aye, aye,” said he, “there is a very good
moral in that story, my friend. It is, as a certain philosopher said,
very true, that there is more in an egg than the meat. And truly,
methinks, there is more in thy story than the story of itself.” He
nodded his head again and stroked his beard slowly, puffing out as he
did so as a great reflective cloud of smoke, through which his eyes
shone and twinkled mistily like stars through a cloud.

“And whose turn is it now?” said Doctor Faustus.

“Methinks tis mine,” said Boots--he who in fairy-tale always sat in the
ashes at home and yet married a princess after he had gone out into the
world awhile. “My story,” said he, “hath no moral, but, all the same, it
is as true as that eggs hatch chickens.” Then, without waiting for any
one to say another word, he began it in these words. “I am going to tell
you,” said he, how--





All Things are as Fate wills.

Once upon a time, in the old, old days, there lived a king who had a
head upon his shoulders wiser than other folk, and this was why: though
he was richer and wiser and greater than most kings, and had all that he
wanted and more into the bargain, he was so afraid of becoming proud of
his own prosperity that he had these words written in letters of gold
upon the walls of each and every room in his palace:

All Things are as Fate wills.

Now, by-and-by and after a while the king died; for when his time comes,
even the rich and the wise man must die, as well as the poor and the
simple man. So the king’s son came, in turn, to be king of that land;
and, though he was not so bad as the world of men goes, he was not the
man that his father was, as this story will show you.

One day, as he sat with his chief councillor, his eyes fell upon the
words written in letters of gold upon the wall--the words that his
father had written there in time gone by:

All Things are as Fate wills; and the young king did not like the taste
of them, for he was very proud of his own greatness. “That is not so,”
 said he, pointing to the words on the wall. “Let them be painted out,
and these words written in their place:

     All Things are as Man does.”

Now, the chief councillor was a grave old man, and had been councillor
to the young king’s father. “Do not be too hasty, my lord king,” said
he. “Try first the truth of your own words before you wipe out those
that your father has written.”

“Very well,” said the young king, “so be it. I will approve the truth of
my words. Bring me hither some beggar from the town whom Fate has made
poor, and I will make him rich. So I will show you that his life shall
be as I will, and not as Fate wills.”

Now, in that town there was a poor beggar-man who used to sit every
day beside the town gate, begging for something for charity’s sake.
Sometimes people gave him a penny or two, but it was little or nothing
that he got, for Fate was against him.

The same day that the king and the chief councillor had had their
talk together, as the beggar sat holding up his wooden bowl and asking
charity of those who passed by, there suddenly came three men who,
without saying a word, clapped hold of him and marched him off.

It was in vain that the beggar talked and questioned--in vain that he
begged and besought them to let him go. Not a word did they say to him,
either of good or bad. At last they came to a gate that led through a
high wall and into a garden, and there the three stopped, and one of
them knocked upon the gate. In answer to his knocking it flew open. He
thrust the beggar into the garden neck and crop, and then the gate was
banged to again.

But what a sight it was the beggar saw before his eyes!--flowers, and
fruit-trees, and marble walks, and a great fountain that shot up a
jet of water as white as snow. But he had not long to stand gaping and
staring around him, for in the garden were a great number of people,
who came hurrying to him, and who, without speaking a word to him or
answering a single question, or as much as giving him time to think,
led him to a marble bath of tepid water. There he was stripped of his
tattered clothes and washed as clean as snow. Then, as some of the
attendants dried him with fine linen towels, others came carrying
clothes fit for a prince to wear, and clad the beggar in them from head
to foot. After that, still without saying a word, they let him out from
the bath again, and there he found still other attendants waiting for
him--two of them holding a milk-white horse, saddled and bridled, and
fit for an emperor to ride. These helped him to mount, and then, leaping
into their own saddles, rode away with the beggar in their midst.

They rode of the garden and into the streets, and on and on they went
until they came to the king’s palace, and there they stopped. Courtiers
and noblemen and great lords were waiting for their coming, some of whom
helped him to dismount from the horse, for by this time the beggar was
so overcome with wonder that he stared like one moon-struck, and as
though his wits were addled. Then, leading the way up the palace steps,
they conducted him from room to room, until at last they came to one
more grand and splendid than all the rest, and there sat the king
himself waiting for the beggar’s coming.

The beggar would have flung himself at the king’s feet, but the king
would not let him; for he came down from the throne where he sat, and,
taking the beggar by the hand, led him up and sat him alongside of him.
Then the king gave orders to the attendants who stood about, and a feast
was served in plates of solid gold upon a table-cloth of silver--a feast
such as the beggar had never dreamed of, and the poor man ate as he had
never eaten in his life before.

All the while that the king and the beggar were eating, musicians played
sweet music and dancers danced and singers sang.

Then when the feast was over there came ten young men, bringing flasks
and flagons of all kinds, full of the best wine in the world; and the
beggar drank as he had never drank in his life before, and until his
head spun like a top.

So the king and the beggar feasted and made merry, until at last the
clock struck twelve and the king arose from his seat. “My friend,” said
he to the beggar, “all these things have been done to show you that Luck
and Fate, which have been against you for all these years, are now for
you. Hereafter, instead of being poor you shall be the richest of
the rich, for I will give you the greatest thing that I have in my
treasury,” Then he called the chief treasurer, who came forward with a
golden tray in his hand. Upon the tray was a purse of silk. “See,” said
the king, “here is a purse, and in the purse are one hundred pieces of
gold money. But though that much may seem great to you, it is but little
of the true value of the purse. Its virtue lies in this: that however
much you may take from it, there will always be one hundred pieces of
gold money left in it. Now go; and while you are enjoying the riches
which I give you, I have only to ask you to remember these are not the
gifts of Fate, but of a mortal man.”

But all the while he was talking the beggar’s head was spinning and
spinning, and buzzing and buzzing, so that he hardly heard a word of
what the king said.

Then when the king had ended his speech, the lords and gentlemen who had
brought the beggar in led him forth again. Out they went through room
after room--out through the courtyard, out through the gate.

Bang!--it was shut to behind him, and he found himself standing in the
darkness of midnight, with the splendid clothes upon his back, and the
magic purse with its hundred pieces of gold money in his pocket.

He stood looking about himself for a while, and then off he started
homeward, staggering and stumbling and shuffling, for the wine that he
had drank made him so light-headed that all the world spun topsy-turvy
around him.

His way led along by the river, and on he went stumbling and staggering.
All of a sudden--plump! splash!--he was in the water over head and ears.
Up he came, spitting out the water and shouting for help, splashing and
sputtering, and kicking and swimming, knowing no more where he was than
the man in the moon. Sometimes his head was under water and sometimes it
was up again.

At last, just as his strength was failing him, his feet struck the
bottom, and he crawled up on the shore more dead than alive. Then,
through fear and cold and wet, he swooned away, and lay for a long time
for all the world as though he were dead.

Now, it chanced that two fisherman were out with their nets that night,
and Luck or Fate led them by the way where the beggar lay on the shore.
“Halloa!” said one of the fishermen, “here is a poor body drowned!” They
turned him over, and then they saw what rich clothes he wore, and felt
that he had a purse in his pocket.

“Come,” said the second fisherman, “he is dead, whoever he is. His fine
clothes and his purse of money can do him no good now, and we might as
well have them as anybody else.” So between them both they stripped the
beggar of all that the king had given him, and left him lying on the
beach.

At daybreak the beggar awoke from the swoon, and there he found himself
lying without a stitch to his back, and half dead with the cold and the
water he had swallowed. Then, fearing lest somebody might see him, he
crawled away into the rushes that grew beside the river, there to hide
himself until night should come again.

But as he went, crawling upon hands and knees, he suddenly came upon a
bundle that had been washed up by the water, and when he laid eyes upon
it his heart leaped within him, for what should that bundle be but the
patches and tatters which he had worn the day before, and which the
attendants had thrown over the garden wall and into the river when they
had dressed him in the fine clothes the king gave him.

He spread his clothes out in the sun until they were dry, and then he
put them on and went back into the town again.

“Well,” said the king, that morning, to his chief councillor, “what do
you think now? Am I not greater than Fate? Did I not make the beggar
rich? And shall I not paint my father’s words out from the wall, and put
my own there instead?”

“I do not know,” said the councillor, shaking his head. “Let us first
see what has become of the beggar.”

“So be it,” said the king; and he and the councillor set off to see
whether the beggar had done as he ought to do with the good things that
the king had given him. So they came to the towngate, and there, lo and
behold! the first thing that they saw was the beggar with his wooden
bowl in his hand asking those who passed by for a stray penny or two.

When the king saw him he turned without a word, and rode back home
again. “Very well,” said he to the chief councillor, “I have tried to
make the beggar rich and have failed; nevertheless, if I cannot make him
I can ruin him in spite of Fate, and that I will show you.”

So all that while the beggar sat at the towngate and begged until came
noontide, when who should he see coming but the same three men who had
come for him the day before. “Ah, ha!” said he to himself, “now the
king is going to give me some more good things.” And so when the three
reached him he was willing enough to go with them, rough as they were.

Off they marched; but this time they did not come to any garden with
fruits and flowers and fountains and marble baths. Off they marched,
and when they stopped it was in front of the king’s palace. This time
no nobles and great lords and courtiers were waiting for his coming;
but instead of that the town hangman--a great ugly fellow, clad in black
from head to foot. Up he came to the beggar, and, catching him by the
scruff of his neck, dragged him up the palace steps and from room to
room until at last he flung him down at the king’s feet.

When the poor beggar gathered wits enough to look about him he saw there
a great chest standing wide open, and with holes in the lid. He wondered
what it was for, but the king gave him no chance to ask; for, beckoning
with his hand, the hangman and the others caught the beggar by arms and
legs, thrust him into the chest, and banged down the lid upon him.

The king locked it and double-locked it, and set his seal upon it; and
there was the beggar as tight as a fly in a bottle.

They carried the chest out and thrust it into a cart and hauled it away,
until at last they came to the sea-shore. There they flung chest and
all into the water, and it floated away like a cork. And that is how the
king set about to ruin the poor beggar-man.

Well, the chest floated on and on for three days, and then at last it
came to the shore of a country far away. There the waves caught it up,
and flung it so hard upon the rocks of the sea-beach that the chest was
burst open by the blow, and the beggar crawled out with eyes as big as
saucers and face as white as dough. After he had sat for a while, and
when his wits came back to him and he had gathered strength enough, he
stood up and looked around to see where Fate had cast him; and far away
on the hill-sides he saw the walls and the roofs and the towers of the
great town, shining in the sunlight as white as snow.

“Well,” said he, “here is something to be thankful for, at least,” and
so saying and shaking the stiffness out of his knees and elbows, he
started off for the white walls and the red roofs in the distance.

At last he reached the great gate, and through it he could see the stony
streets and multitudes of people coming and going.

But it was not for him to enter that gate. Out popped two soldiers with
great battle-axes in their hands and looking as fierce as dragons. “Are
you a stranger in this town?” said one in a great, gruff voice.

“Yes,” said the beggar, “I am.”

“And where are you going?”

“I am going into the town.”

“No, you are not.”

“Why not?”

“Because no stranger enters here. Yonder is the pathway. You must take
that if you would enter the town.”

“Very well,” said the beggar, “I would just as lief go into the town
that way as another.”

So off he marched without another word. On and on he went along the
narrow pathway until at last he came to a little gate of polished brass.
Over the gate were written these words, in great letters as red as
blood:

“Who Enters here Shall Surely Die.”

Many and many a man besides the beggar had travelled that path and
looked up at those letters, and when he had read them had turned and
gone away again. But the beggar neither turned nor went away; because
why, he could neither read nor write a word, and so the blood-red
letters had no fear for him. Up he marched to the brazen gate, as boldly
as though it had been a kitchen door, and rap! tap! tap! he knocked upon
it. He waited awhile, but nobody came. Rap! tap! tap! he knocked again;
and then, after a little while, for the third time--Rap! tap! tap! Then
instantly the gate swung open and he entered. So soon as he had crossed
the threshold it was banged to behind him again, just as the garden gate
had been when the king had first sent for him. He found himself in a
long, dark entry, and at the end of it another door, and over it the
same words, written in blood-red letters:

“Beware! Beware! Who Enters here Shall Surely Die!”

“Well,” said the beggar, “this is the hardest town for a body to come
into that I ever saw.” And then he opened the second door and passed
through.

It was fit to deafen a body! Such a shout the beggar’s ears had never
heard before; such a sight the beggar’s eyes had never beheld, for
there, before him, was a great splendid hall of marble as white as snow.
All along the hall stood scores of lords and ladies in silks and satins,
and with jewels on their necks and arms fit to dazzle a body’s eyes.
Right up the middle of the hall stretched a carpet of blue velvet, and
at the farther end, on a throne of gold, sat a lady as beautiful as the
sun and moon and all the stars.

“Welcome! welcome!” they all shouted, until the beggar was nearly
deafened by the noise they all made, and the lady herself stood up and
smiled upon him.

Then there came three young men, and led the beggar up the carpet of
velvet to the throne of gold.

“Welcome, my hero!” said the beautiful lady; “and have you, then, come
at last?”

“Yes,” said the beggar, “I have.”

“Long have I waited for you,” said the lady; “long have I waited for the
hero who would dare without fear to come through the two gates of death
to marry me and to rule as king over this country, and now at last you
are here.”

“Yes,” said the beggar, “I am.”

Meanwhile, while all these things were happening, the king of that other
country had painted out the words his father had written on the walls,
and had had these words painted in in their stead:

“All Things are as Man does.”

For a while he was very well satisfied with them, until, a week after,
he was bidden to the wedding of the Queen of the Golden Mountains; for
when he came there who should the bridegroom be but the beggar whom he
had set adrift in the wooden box a week or so before.

The bridegroom winked at him, but said never a word, good or ill, for he
was willing to let all that had happened be past and gone. But the king
saw how matters stood as clear as daylight, and when he got back home
again he had the new words that stood on the walls of the room painted
out, and had the old ones painted in in bigger letters than ever:

“All Things are as Fate wills.”


All the good people who were gathered around the table of the Sign of
Mother Goose sat thinking for a while over the story. As for Boots, he
buried his face in the quart pot and took a long, long pull at the ale.

“Methinks,” said the Soldier who cheated the Devil, presently breaking
silence--“methinks there be very few of the women folk who do their
share of this story-telling. So far we have had but one, and that is
Lady Cinderella. I see another one present, and I drink to her health.”

He winked his eye at Patient Grizzle, beckoning towards her with his
quart pot, and took a long and hearty pull. Then he banged his mug down
upon the table. “Fetch me another glass, lass,” said he to little Brown
Betty. “Meantime, fair lady”--this he said to Patient Grizzle--“will you
not entertain us with some story of your own?”

“I know not,” said Patient Grizzle, “that I can tell you any story worth
your hearing.”

“Aye, aye, but you can,” said the Soldier who cheated the Devil; “and,
moreover, anything coming from betwixt such red lips and such white
teeth will be worth the listening to.”

Patient Grizzle smiled, and the brave little Tailor, and the Lad who
fiddled for the Jew, and Hans and Bidpai and Boots nodded approval.

“Aye,” said Ali Baba, “it is true enough that there have been but few
of the women folk who have had their say, and methinks that it is very
strange and unaccountable, for nearly always they have plenty to speak
in their own behalf.”

All who sat there in Twilight Land laughed, and even Patient Grizzle
smiled.

“Very well,” said Patient Grizzle, “if you will have it, I will tell you
a story. It is about a fisherman who was married and had a wife of his
own, and who made her carry all the load of everything that happened to
him. For he, like most men I wot of, had found out--”




Where to Lay the Blame.

Many and many a man has come to trouble--so he will say--by following
his wife’s advice. This is how it was with a man of whom I shall tell
you.

There was once upon a time a fisherman who had fished all day long and
had caught not so much as a sprat. So at night there he sat by the fire,
rubbing his knees and warming his shins, and waiting for supper that his
wife was cooking for him, and his hunger was as sharp as vinegar, and
his temper hot enough to fry fat.

While he sat there grumbling and growling and trying to make himself
comfortable and warm, there suddenly came a knock at the door. The good
woman opened it, and there stood an old man, clad all in red from head
to foot, and with a snowy beard at his chin as white as winter snow.

The fisherman’s wife stood gaping and staring at the strange figure,
but the old man in red walked straight into the hut. “Bring your nets,
fisherman,” said he, “and come with me. There is something that I want
you to catch for me, and if I have luck I will pay you for your fishing
as never fisherman was paid before.”

“Not I,” said the fisherman, “I go out no more this night. I have been
fishing all day long until my back is nearly broken, and have caught
nothing, and now I am not such a fool as to go out and leave a warm fire
and a good supper at your bidding.”

But the fisherman’s wife had listened to what the old man had said about
paying for the job, and she was of a different mind from her husband.
“Come,” said she, “the old man promises to pay you well. This is not a
chance to be lost, I can tell you, and my advice to you is that you go.”

The fisherman shook his head. No, he would not go; he had said he would
not, and he would not. But the wife only smiled and said again, “My
advice to you is that you go.”

The fisherman grumbled and grumbled, and swore that he would not go. The
wife said nothing but one thing. She did not argue; she did not lose her
temper; she only said to everything that he said, “My advice to you is
that you go.”

At last the fisherman’s anger boiled over. “Very well,” said he,
spitting his words at her; “if you will drive me out into the night, I
suppose I will have to go.” And then he spoke the words that so many men
say: “Many a man has come to trouble by following his wife’s advice.”

Then down he took his fur cap and up he took his nets, and off he and
the old man marched through the moonlight, their shadows bobbing along
like black spiders behind them.

Well, on they went, out from the town and across the fields and through
the woods, until at last they came to a dreary, lonesome desert, where
nothing was to be seen but gray rocks and weeds and thistles.

“Well,” said the fisherman, “I have fished, man and boy, for forty-seven
years, but never did I see as unlikely a place to catch anything as
this.”

But the old man said never a word. First of all he drew a great circle
with strange figures, marking it with his finger upon the ground. Then
out from under his red gown he brought a tinder-box and steel, and a
little silver casket covered all over with strange figures of serpents
and dragons and what not. He brought some sticks of spice-wood from his
pouch, and then he struck a light and made a fire. Out of the box he
took a gray powder, which he flung upon the little blaze.

Puff! flash! A vivid flame went up into the moonlight, and then a dense
smoke as black as ink, which spread out wider and wider, far and near,
till all below was darker than the darkest midnight. Then the old
man began to utter strange spells and words. Presently there began a
rumbling that sounded louder and louder and nearer and nearer, until it
roared and bellowed like thunder. The earth rocked and swayed, and the
poor fisherman shook and trembled with fear till his teeth clattered in
his head.

Then suddenly the roaring and bellowing ceased, and all was as still as
death, though the darkness was as thick and black as ever.

“Now,” said the old magician--for such he was--“now we are about to take
a journey such as no one ever travelled before. Heed well what I tell
you. Speak not a single word, for if you do, misfortune will be sure to
happen.”

“Ain’t I to say anything?” said the fisherman.

“No.”

“Not even boo’ to a goose?”

“No.”

“Well, that is pretty hard upon a man who likes to say his say,” said
the fisherman.

“And moreover,” said the old man, “I must blindfold you as well.”

Thereupon he took from his pocket a handkerchief, and made ready to tie
it about the fisherman’s eyes.

“And ain’t I to see anything at all?” said the fisherman.

“No.”

“Not even so much as a single feather?”

“No.”

“Well, then,” said the fisherman, “I wish I’d not come.”

But the old man tied the handkerchief tightly around his eyes, and then
he was as blind as a bat.

“Now,” said the old man, “throw your leg over what you feel and hold
fast.”

The fisherman reached down his hand, and there felt the back of
something rough and hairy. He flung his leg over it, and whisk! whizz!
off he shot through the air like a sky-rocket. Nothing was left for him
to do but grip tightly with hands and feet and to hold fast. On they
went, and on they went, until, after a great while, whatever it was
that was carrying him lit upon the ground, and there the fisherman found
himself standing, for that which had brought him had gone.

The old man whipped the handkerchief off his eyes, and there the
fisherman found himself on the shores of the sea, where there was
nothing to be seen but water upon one side and rocks and naked sand upon
the other.

“This is the place for you to cast your nets,” said the old magician;
“for if we catch nothing here we catch nothing at all.”

The fisherman unrolled his nets and cast them and dragged them, and then
cast them and dragged them again, but neither time caught so much as
a herring. But the third time that he cast he found that he had caught
something that weighed as heavy as lead. He pulled and pulled, until
by-and-by he dragged the load ashore, and what should it be but a great
chest of wood, blackened by the sea-water, and covered with shells and
green moss.

That was the very thing that the magician had come to fish for.

From his pouch the old man took a little golden key, which he fitted
into a key-hole in the side of the chest. He threw back the lid; the
fisherman looked within, and there was the prettiest little palace that
man’s eye ever beheld, all made of mother-of-pearl and silver-frosted as
white as snow. The old magician lifted the little palace out of the box
and set it upon the ground.

Then, lo and behold! a marvellous thing happened; for the palace
instantly began to grow for all the world like a soap-bubble, until it
stood in the moonlight gleaming and glistening like snow, the windows
bright with the lights of a thousand wax tapers, and the sound of music
and voices and laughter coming from within.

Hardly could the fisherman catch his breath from one strange thing
when another happened. The old magician took off his clothes and his
face--yes, his face--for all the world as though it had been a mask, and
there stood as handsome and noble a young man as ever the light looked
on. Then, beckoning to the fisherman, dumb with wonder, he led the way
up the great flight of marble steps to the palace door. As he came
the door swung open with a blaze of light, and there stood hundreds of
noblemen, all clad in silks and satins and velvets, who, when they
saw the magician, bowed low before him, as though he had been a king.
Leading the way, they brought the two through halls and chambers and
room after room, each more magnificent than the other, until they came
to one that surpassed a hundredfold any of the others.

At the farther end was a golden throne, and upon it sat a lady more
lovely and beautiful than a dream, her eyes as bright as diamonds, her
cheeks like rose leaves, and her hair like spun gold. She came half-way
down the steps of the throne to welcome the magician, and when the two
met they kissed one another before all those who were looking on. Then
she brought him to the throne and seated him beside her, and there they
talked for a long time very earnestly.

Nobody said a word to the fisherman, who stood staring about him like an
owl. “I wonder,” said he to himself at last, “if they will give a body a
bite to eat by-and-by?” for, to tell the truth, the good supper that
he had come away from at home had left a sharp hunger gnawing at his
insides, and he longed for something good and warm to fill the empty
place. But time passed, and not so much as a crust of bread was brought
to stay his stomach.

By-and-by the clock struck twelve, and then the two who sat upon the
throne arose. The beautiful lady took the magician by the hand, and,
turning to those who stood around, said, in a loud voice, “Behold him
who alone is worthy to possess the jewel of jewels! Unto him do I give
it, and with it all power of powers!” Thereon she opened a golden casket
that stood beside her, and brought thence a little crystal ball, about
as big as a pigeon’s egg, in which was something that glistened like a
spark of fire. The magician took the crystal ball and thrust it into his
bosom; but what it was the fisherman could not guess, and if you do not
know I shall not tell you.

Then for the first time the beautiful lady seemed to notice the
fisherman. She beckoned him, and when he stood beside her two men came
carrying a chest. The chief treasurer opened it, and it was full of bags
of gold money. “How will you have it?” said the beautiful lady.

“Have what?” said the fisherman.

“Have the pay for your labor?” said the beautiful lady.

“I will,” said the fisherman, promptly, “take it in my hat.”

“So be it,” said the beautiful lady. She waved her hand, and the chief
treasurer took a bag from the chest, untied it, and emptied a cataract
of gold into the fur cap. The fisherman had never seen so much wealth in
all his life before, and he stood like a man turned to stone.

“Is this all mine?” said the fisherman.

“It is,” said the beautiful lady.

“Then God bless your pretty eyes,” said the fisherman.

Then the magician kissed the beautiful lady, and, beckoning to the
fisherman, left the throne-room the same way that they had come. The
noblemen, in silks and satins and velvets, marched ahead, and back they
went through the other apartments, until at last they came to the door.

Out they stepped, and then what do you suppose happened?

If the wonderful palace had grown like a bubble, like a bubble it
vanished. There the two stood on the sea-shore, with nothing to be seen
but rocks and sand and water, and the starry sky overhead.

The fisherman shook his cap of gold, and it jingled and tinkled, and was
as heavy as lead. If it was not all a dream, he was rich for life. “But
anyhow,” said he, “they might have given a body a bite to eat.”

The magician put on his red clothes and his face again, making himself
as hoary and as old as before. He took out his flint and steel, and
his sticks of spice-wood and his gray powder, and made a great fire and
smoke just as he had done before. Then again he tied his handkerchief
over the fisherman’s eyes. “Remember,” said he, “what I told you when we
started upon our journey. Keep your mouth tight shut, for if you utter
so much as a single word you are a lost man. Now throw your leg over
what you feel and hold fast.”

The fisherman had his net over one arm and his cap of gold in the other
hand; nevertheless, there he felt the same hairy thing he had felt
before. He flung his leg over it, and away he was gone through the air
like a sky-rocket.

Now, he had grown somewhat used to strange things by this time, so he
began to think that he would like to see what sort of a creature it was
upon which he was riding thus through the sky. So he contrived, in spite
of his net and cap, to push up the handkerchief from over one eye. Out
he peeped, and then he saw as clear as day what the strange steed was.

He was riding upon a he-goat as black as night, and in front of him
was the magician riding upon just such another, his great red robe
fluttering out behind him in the moonlight like huge red wings.

“Great herring and little fishes!” roared the fisherman; “it is a
billy-goat!”

Instantly goats, old man, and all were gone like a flash. Down fell the
fisherman through the empty sky, whirling over and over and around and
around like a frog. He held tightly to his net, but away flew his fur
cap, the golden money falling in a shower like sparks of yellow light.
Down he fell and down he fell, until his head spun like a top.

By good-luck his house was just below, with its thatch of soft
rushes. Into the very middle of it he tumbled, and right through the
thatch--bump!--into the room below.

The good wife was in bed, snoring away for dear life; but such a noise
as the fisherman made coming into the house was enough to wake the dead.
Up she jumped, and there she sat, staring and winking with sleep, and
with her brains as addled as a duck’s egg in a thunder-storm.

“There!” said the fisherman, as he gathered himself up and rubbed his
shoulder, “that is what comes of following a woman’s advice!”


All the good folk clapped their hands, not so much because of the story
itself, but because it was a woman who told it.

“Aye, aye,” said the brave little Tailor, “there is truth in what you
tell, fair lady, and I like very well the way in which you have told
it.”

“Whose turn is it next?” said Doctor Faustus, lighting a fresh pipe of
tobacco.

“Tis the turn of yonder old gentleman,” said the Soldier who cheated
the Devil, and he pointed with the stem of his pipe to the Fisherman who
unbottled the Genie that King Solomon had corked up and thrown into the
sea. “Every one else hath told a story, and now it is his turn.”

“I will not deny, my friend, that what you say is true, and that it is
my turn,” said the Fisherman. “Nor will I deny that I have already a
story in my mind. It is,” said he, “about a certain prince, and of how
he went through many and one adventures, and at last discovered that
which is--”




The Salt of Life.

Once upon a time there was a king who had three sons, and by the time
that the youngest prince had down upon his chin the king had grown so
old that the cares of the kingdom began to rest over-heavily upon his
shoulders. So he called his chief councillor and told him that he was of
a mind to let the princes reign in his stead. To the son who loved him
the best he would give the largest part of his kingdom, to the son who
loved him the next best the next part, and to the son who loved him the
least the least part. The old councillor was very wise and shook his
head, but the king’s mind had long been settled as to what he was about
to do. So he called the princes to him one by one and asked each as to
how much he loved him.

“I love you as a mountain of gold,” said the oldest prince, and the king
was very pleased that his son should give him such love.

“I love you as a mountain of silver,” said the second prince, and the
king was pleased with that also.

But when the youngest prince was called, he did not answer at first, but
thought and thought. At last he looked up. “I love you,” said he, “as I
love salt.”

When the king heard what his youngest son said he was filled with anger.
“What!” he cried, “do you love me no better than salt--a stuff that is
the most bitter of all things to the taste, and the cheapest and the
commonest of all things in the world? Away with you, and never let me
see your face again! Henceforth you are no son of mine.”

The prince would have spoken, but the king would not allow him, and bade
his guards thrust the young man forth from the room.

Now the queen loved the youngest prince the best of all her sons, and
when she heard how the king was about to drive him forth into the wide
world to shift for himself, she wept and wept. “Ah, my son!” said she to
him, “it is little or nothing that I have to give you. Nevertheless, I
have one precious thing. Here is a ring; take it and wear it always,
for so long as you have it upon your finger no magic can have power over
you.”

Thus it was that the youngest prince set forth into the wide world with
little or nothing but a ring upon his finger.

For seven days he travelled on, and knew not where he was going or
whither his footsteps led. At the end of that time he came to the gates
of a town. The prince entered the gates, and found himself in a city
the like of which he had never seen in his life before for grandeur and
magnificence--beautiful palaces and gardens, stores and bazaars crowded
with rich stuffs of satin and silk and wrought silver and gold of
cunningest workmanship; for the land to which he had come was the
richest in all of the world. All that day he wandered up and down, and
thought nothing of weariness and hunger for wonder of all that he
saw. But at last evening drew down, and he began to bethink himself of
somewhere to lodge during the night.

Just then he came to a bridge, over the wall of which leaned an old man
with a long white beard, looking down into the water. He was dressed
richly but soberly, and every now and then he sighed and groaned, and as
the prince drew near he saw the tears falling--drip, drip--from the old
man’s eyes.

The prince had a kind heart, and could not bear to see one in distress;
so he spoke to the old man, and asked him his trouble.

“Ah, me!” said the other, “only yesterday I had a son, tall and handsome
like yourself. But the queen took him to sup with her, and I am left all
alone in my old age, like a tree stripped of leaves and fruit.”

“But surely,” said the prince, “it can be no such sad matter to sup with
a queen. That is an honor that most men covet.”

“Ah!” said the old man, “you are a stranger in this place, or else you
would know that no youth so chosen to sup with the queen ever returns to
his home again.”

“Yes,” said the prince, “I am a stranger and have only come hither this
day, and so do not understand these things. Even when I found you I was
about to ask the way to some inn where folk of good condition lodge.”

“Then come home with me to-night,” said the old man. “I live all alone,
and I will tell you the trouble that lies upon this country.” Thereupon,
taking the prince by the arm, he led him across the bridge and to
another quarter of the town where he dwelt. He bade the servants prepare
a fine supper, and he and the prince sat down to the table together.
After they had made an end of eating and drinking, the old man told the
prince all concerning those things of which he had spoken, and thus it
was:

“When the king of this land died he left behind him three daughters--the
most beautiful princesses in all of the world.

“Folk hardly dared speak of the eldest of them, but whisperings said
that she was a sorceress, and that strange and gruesome things were done
by her. The second princess was also a witch, though it was not said
that she was evil, like the other. As for the youngest of the three, she
was as beautiful as the morning and as gentle as a dove. When she was
born a golden thread was about her neck, and it was foretold of her that
she was to be the queen of that land.

“But not long after the old king died the youngest princess vanished--no
one could tell whither, and no one dared to ask--and the eldest princess
had herself crowned as queen, and no one dared gainsay her. For a while
everything went well enough, but by-and-by evil days came upon the land.
Once every seven days the queen would bid some youth, young and strong,
to sup with her, and from that time no one ever heard of him again, and
no one dared ask what had become of him. At first it was the great
folk at the queen’s palace--officers and courtiers--who suffered; but
by-and-by the sons of the merchants and the chief men of the city began
to be taken. One time,” said the old man, “I myself had three sons--as
noble young men as could be found in the wide world. One day the chief
of the queen’s officers came to my house and asked me concerning how
many sons I had. I was forced to tell him, and in a little while they
were taken one by one to the queen’s palace, and I never saw them again.

“But misfortune, like death, comes upon the young as well as the old.
You yourself have had trouble, or else I am mistaken. Tell me what
lies upon your heart, my son, for the talking of it makes the burthen
lighter.”

The prince did as the old man bade him, and told all of his story; and
so they sat talking and talking until far into the night, and the old
man grew fonder and fonder of the prince the more he saw of him. So the
end of the matter was that he asked the prince to live with him as his
son, seeing that the young man had now no father and he no children, and
the prince consented gladly enough.

So the two lived together like father and son, and the good old man
began to take some joy in life once more.

But one day who should come riding up to the door but the chief of the
queen’s officers.

“How is this?” said he to the old man, when he saw the prince. “Did you
not tell me that you had but three sons, and is this not a fourth?”

It was of no use for the old man to tell the officer that the youth was
not his son, but was a prince who had come to visit that country. The
officer drew forth his tablets and wrote something upon them, and then
went his way, leaving the old man sighing and groaning. “Ah, me!” said
he, “my heart sadly forebodes trouble.”

Sure enough, before three days had passed a bidding came to the prince
to make ready to sup with the queen that night.

When evening drew near a troop of horsemen came, bringing a white horse
with a saddle and bridle of gold studded with precious stones, to take
the prince to the queen’s palace.

As soon as they had brought him thither they led the prince to a room
where was a golden table spread with a snow-white cloth and set with
dishes of gold. At the end of the table the queen sat waiting for him,
and her face was hidden by a veil of silver gauze. She raised the veil
and looked at the prince, and when he saw her face he stood as one
wonder-struck, for not only was she so beautiful, but she set a spell
upon him with the evil charm of her eyes. No one sat at the table but
the queen and the prince, and a score of young pages served them, and
sweet music sounded from a curtained gallery.

At last came midnight, and suddenly a great gong sounded from the
court-yard outside. Then in an instant the music was stopped, the pages
that served them hurried from the room, and presently all was as still
as death.

Then, when all were gone, the queen arose and beckoned the prince, and
he had no choice but to arise also and follow whither she led. She took
him through the palace, where all was as still as the grave, and so came
out by a postern door into a garden. Beside the postern a torch burned
in a bracket. The queen took it down, and then led the prince up a path
and under the silent trees until they came to a great wall of rough
stone. She pressed her hand upon one of the great stones, and it opened
like a door, and there was a flight of steps that led downward. The
queen descended these steps, and the prince followed closely behind her.
At the bottom was a long passage-way, and at the farther end the prince
saw what looked like a bright spark of light, as though the sun were
shining. She thrust the torch into another bracket in the wall of the
passage, and then led the way towards the light. It grew larger and
larger as they went forward, until at last they came out at the farther
end, and there the prince found himself standing in the sunlight and
not far from the seashore. The queen led the way towards the shore, when
suddenly a great number of black dogs came running towards them, barking
and snapping, and showing their teeth as though they would tear the two
in pieces. But the queen drew from her bosom a whip with a steel-pointed
lash, and as the dogs came springing towards them she laid about her
right and left, till the skin flew and the blood ran, and the dogs
leaped away howling and yelping.

At the edge of the water was a great stone mill, and the queen pointed
towards it and bade the prince turn it. Strong as he was, it was as much
as he could do to work it; but grind it he did, though the sweat ran
down his face in streams. By-and-by a speck appeared far away upon the
water; and as the prince ground and ground at the mill the speck grew
larger and larger. It was something upon the water, and it came nearer
and nearer as swiftly as the wind. At last it came close enough for him
to see that it was a little boat all of brass. By-and-by the boat struck
upon the beach, and as soon as it did so the queen entered it, bidding
the prince do the same.

No sooner were they seated than away the boat went, still as swiftly as
the wind. On it flew and on it flew, until at last they came to another
shore, the like of which the prince had never seen in his life before.
Down to the edge of the water ran a garden--but such a garden! The
leaves of the trees were all of silver and the fruit of gold, and
instead of flowers were precious stones--white, red, yellow, blue, and
green--that flashed like sparks of sunlight as the breeze moved them
this way and that way. Beyond the silver trees, with their golden fruit,
was a great palace as white as snow, and so bright that one had to shut
one’s eyes as one looked upon it.

The boat ran up on the beach close to just such a stone mill as the
prince had seen upon the other side of the water, and then he and
the queen stepped ashore. As soon as they had done so the brazen boat
floated swiftly away, and in a little while was gone.

“Here our journey ends,” said the queen. “Is it not a wonderful land,
and well worth the seeing? Look at all these jewels and this gold, as
plenty as fruits and flowers at home. You may take what you please; but
while you are gathering them I have another matter after which I must
look. Wait for me here, and by-and-by I will be back again.”

So saying, she turned and left the prince, going towards the castle back
of the trees.

But the prince was a prince, and not a common man; he cared nothing for
gold and jewels. What he did care for was to see where the queen went,
and why she had brought him to this strange land. So, as soon as she had
fairly gone, he followed after.

He went along under the gold and silver trees, in the direction she had
taken, until at last he came to a tall flight of steps that led up to
the doorway of the snow-white palace. The door stood open, and into it
the prince went. He saw not a soul, but he heard a noise as of blows and
the sound as of some one weeping. He followed the sound, until by-and-by
he came to a great vaulted room in the very centre of the palace. A
curtain hung at the doorway. The prince lifted it and peeped within, and
this was what he saw:

In the middle of the room was a marble basin of water as clear as
crystal, and around the sides of the basin were these words, written in
letters of gold:

“Whatsoever is False, that I make True.”

Beside the fountain upon a marble stand stood a statue of a beautiful
woman made of alabaster, and around the neck of the statue was a thread
of gold. The queen stood beside the statue, and beat and beat it with
her steel-tipped whip. And all the while she lashed it the statue sighed
and groaned like a living being, and the tears ran down its stone cheeks
as though it were a suffering Christian. By-and-by the queen rested for
a moment, and said, panting, “Will you give me the thread of gold?” and
the statue answered “No.” Whereupon she fell to raining blows upon it as
she had done before.

So she continued, now beating the statue and now asking it whether it
would give her the thread of gold, to which the statue always answered
“No,” and all the while the prince stood gazing and wondering. By-and-by
the queen wearied of what she was doing, and thrust the steel-tipped
lash back into her bosom again, upon which the prince, seeing that
she was done, hurried back to the garden where she had left him and
pretended to be gathering the golden fruit and jewel flowers.

The queen said nothing to him good or bad, except to command him to
grind at the great stone mill as he had done on the other side of the
water. Thereupon the prince did as she bade, and presently the brazen
boat came skimming over the water more swiftly than the wind. Again the
queen and the prince entered it, and again it carried them to the other
side whence they had come.

No sooner had the queen set foot upon the shore than she stopped and
gathered up a handful of sand. Then, turning as quick as lightning, she
flung it into the prince’s face. “Be a black dog,” she cried in a loud
voice, “and join your comrades!”

And now it was that the ring that the prince’s mother had given him
stood him in good stead. But for it he would have become a black dog
like those others, for thus it had happened to all before him who had
ferried the witch queen over the water. So she expected to see him
run away yelping, as those others had done; but the prince remained a
prince, and stood looking her in the face.

When the queen saw that her magic had failed her she grew as pale as
death, and fell to trembling in every limb. She turned and hastened
quickly away, and the prince followed her wondering, for he neither knew
the mischief she had intended doing him, nor how his ring had saved him
from the fate of those others.

So they came back up the stairs and out through the stone wall into
the palace garden. The queen pressed her hand against the stone and it
turned back into its place again. Then, beckoning to the prince, she
hurried away down the garden. Before he followed he picked up a coal
that lay near by, and put a cross upon the stone; then he hurried after
her, and so came to the palace once more.

By this time the cocks were crowing, and the dawn of day was just
beginning to show over the roof-tops and the chimney-stacks of the town.

As for the queen, she had regained her composure, and, bidding the
prince wait for her a moment, she hastened to her chamber. There she
opened her book of magic, and in it she soon found who the prince was
and how the ring had saved him.

When she had learned all that she wanted to know she put on a smiling
face and came back to him. “Ah, prince,” said she, “I well know who you
are, for your coming to my country is not secret to me. I have shown
you strange things to-night. I will unfold all the wonder to you another
time. Will you not come back and sup with me again?”

“Yes,” said the prince, “I will come whensoever you bid me;” for he was
curious to know the secret of the statue and the strange things he had
seen.

“And will you not give me a pledge of your coming?” said the queen,
still smiling.

“What pledge shall I give you,” said the prince.

“Give me the ring that is upon your finger,” said the queen; and she
smiled so bewitchingly that the prince could not have refused her had he
desired to do so.

Alas for him! He thought no evil, but, without a word, drew off the ring
and gave it to the queen, and she slipped it upon her finger.

“O fool!” she cried, laughing a wicked laugh, “O fool! to give away that
in which your safety lay!” As she spoke she dipped her fingers into a
basin of water that stood near by and dashed the drops into the prince’s
face. “Be a raven,” she cried, “and a raven remain!”

In an instant the prince was a prince no longer, but a coal-black raven.
The queen snatched up a sword that lay near by and struck at him to kill
him. But the raven-prince leaped aside and the blow missed its aim.

By good luck a window stood open, and before the queen could strike
again he spread his wings and flew out of the open casement and over the
house-tops and was gone.

On he flew and on he flew until he came to the old man’s house, and so
to the room where his foster-father himself was sitting. He lit upon the
ground at the old man’s feet and tried to tell him what had befallen,
but all that he could say was “Croak! croak!”

“What brings this bird of ill omen?” said the old man, and he drew his
sword to kill it. He raised his hand to strike, but the raven did not
try to fly away as he had expected, but bowed his neck to receive the
stroke. Then the old man saw that the tears were running down from the
raven’s eyes, and he held his hand. “What strange thing is this?” he
said. “Surely nothing but the living soul weeps; and how, then, can this
bird shed tears?” So he took the raven up and looked into his eyes, and
in them he saw the prince’s soul. “Alas!” he cried, “my heart misgives
me that something strange has happened. Tell me, is this not my
foster-son, the prince?”

The raven answered “Croak!” and nothing else; but the good old man
understood it all, and the tears ran down his cheeks and trickled over
his beard. “Whether man or raven, you shall still be my son,” said he,
and he held the raven close in his arms and caressed it.

He had a golden cage made for the bird, and every day he would walk with
it in the garden, talking to it as a father talks to his son.

One day when they were thus in the garden together a strange lady came
towards them down the pathway. Over her had and face was drawn a thick
veil, so that the two could not tell who she was. When she came close to
them she raised the veil, and the raven-prince saw that her face was the
living likeness of the queen’s; and yet there was something in it that
was different. It was the second sister of the queen, and the old man
knew her and bowed before her.

“Listen,” said she. “I know what the raven is, and that it is the
prince, whom the queen has bewitched. I also know nearly as much of
magic as she, and it is that alone that has saved me so long from ill.
But danger hangs close over me; the queen only waits for the chance to
bewitch me; and some day she will overpower me, for she is stronger
than I. With the prince’s aid I can overcome her and make myself forever
safe, and it is this that has brought me here to-day. My magic is
powerful enough to change the prince back into his true shape again, and
I will do so if he will aid me in what follows, and this is it: I will
conjure the queen, and by-and-by a great eagle will come flying, and its
plumage will be as black as night. Then I myself will become an eagle,
with black-and-white plumage, and we two will fight in the air. After a
while we will both fall to the ground, and then the prince must cut off
the head of the black eagle with a knife I shall give him. Will you do
this?” said she, turning to the raven, “if I transform you to your true
shape?”

The raven bowed his head and said “Croak!” And the sister of the queen
knew that he meant yes.

Therewith she drew a great, long keen knife from her bosom, and thrust
it into the ground. “It is with this knife of magic,” said she, “that
you must cut off the black eagle’s head.” Then the witch-princess
gathered up some sand in her hand, and flung it into the raven’s face.
“Resume,” cried she, “your own shape!” And in an instant the prince was
himself again. The next thing the sister of the queen did was to draw a
circle upon the ground around the prince, the old man, and herself. On
the circle she marked strange figures here and there. Then, all three
standing close together, she began her conjurations, uttering strange
words--now under her breath, and now clear and loud.

Presently the sky darkened, and it began to thunder and rumble. Darker
it grew and darker, and the thunder crashed and roared. The earth
trembled under their feet, and the trees swayed hither and thither as
though tossed by a tempest. Then suddenly the uproar ceased and all grew
as still as death, the clouds rolled away, and in a moment the sun shone
out once more, and all was calm and serene as it had been before. But
still the princess muttered her conjurations, and as the prince and the
old man looked they beheld a speck that grew larger and larger, until
they saw that it was an eagle as black as night that was coming swiftly
flying through the sky. Then the queen’s sister also saw it and ceased
from her spells. She drew a little cap of feathers from her bosom with
trembling hands. “Remember,” said she to the prince; and, so saying,
clapped the feather cap upon her head. In an instant she herself became
an eagle--pied, black and white--and, spreading her wings, leaped into
the air.

For a while the two eagles circled around and around; but at last they
dashed against one another, and, grappling with their talons, tumbled
over and over until they struck the ground close to the two who stood
looking.

Then the prince snatched the knife from the ground and ran to where they
lay struggling. “Which was I to kill?” said he to the old man.

“Are they not birds of a feather?” cried the foster-father. “Kill them
both, for then only shall we all be safe.”

The prince needed no second telling to see the wisdom of what the old
man said. In an instant he struck off the heads of both the eagles, and
thus put an end to both sorceresses, the lesser as well as the greater.
They buried both of the eagles in the garden without telling any one of
what had happened. So soon as that was done the old man bade the prince
tell him all that had befallen him, and the prince did so.

“Aye! aye!” said the old man, “I see it all as clear as day. The black
dogs are the young men who have supped with the queen; the statue is the
good princess; and the basin of water is the water of life, which has
the power of taking away magic. Come; let us make haste to bring help to
all those unfortunates who have been lying under the queen’s spells.”

The prince needed no urging to do that. They hurried to the palace; they
crossed the garden to the stone wall. There they found the stone upon
which the prince had set the black cross. He pressed his hand upon it,
and it opened to him like a door. They descended the steps, and went
through the passageway, until they came out upon the sea-shore. The
black dogs came leaping towards them; but this time it was to fawn upon
them, and to lick their hands and faces.

The prince turned the great stone mill till the brazen boat came flying
towards the shore. They entered it, and so crossed the water and came to
the other side. They did not tarry in the garden, but went straight to
the snow-white palace and to the great vaulted chamber where was the
statue. “Yes,” said the old man, “it is the youngest princess, sure
enough.”

The prince said nothing, but he dipped up some of the water in his palm
and dashed it upon the statue. “If you are the princess, take your true
shape again,” said he. Before the words had left his lips the statue
became flesh and blood, and the princess stepped down from where
she stood, and the prince thought that he had never seen any one so
beautiful as she. “You have brought me back to life,” said she, “and
whatever I shall have shall be yours as well as mine.”

Then they all set their faces homeward again, and the prince took with
him a cupful of the water of life.

When they reached the farther shore the black dogs came running to meet
them. The prince sprinkled the water he carried upon them, and as soon
as it touched them that instant they were black dogs no longer, but the
tall, noble young men that the sorceress queen had bewitched. There, as
the old man had hoped, he found his own three sons, and kissed them with
the tears running down his face.

But when the people of that land learned that their youngest princess,
and the one whom they loved, had come back again, and that the two
sorceresses would trouble them no longer, they shouted and shouted for
joy. All the town was hung with flags and illuminated, the fountains ran
with wine, and nothing was heard but sounds of rejoicing. In the midst
of it all the prince married the princess, and so became the king of
that country.

And now to go back again to the beginning.

After the youngest prince had been driven away from home, and the old
king had divided the kingdom betwixt the other two, things went for a
while smoothly and joyfully. But by little and little the king was put
to one side until he became as nothing in his own land. At last hot
words passed between the father and the two sons, and the end of the
matter was that the king was driven from the land to shift for himself.

Now, after the youngest prince had married and had become king of that
other land, he bethought himself of his father and his mother, and
longed to see them again. So he set forth and travelled towards his old
home. In his journeying he came to a lonely house at the edge of a great
forest, and there night came upon him. He sent one of the many of those
who rode with him to ask whether he could not find lodging there for
the time, and who should answer the summons but the king, his father,
dressed in the coarse clothing of a forester. The old king did not know
his own son in the kingly young king who sat upon his snow-white horse.
He bade the visitor to enter, and he and the old queen served their son
and bowed before him.

The next morning the young king rode back to his own land, and then sent
attendants with horses and splendid clothes, and bade them bring his
father and mother to his own home.

He had a noble feast set for them, with everything befitting the
entertainment of a king, but he ordered that not a grain of salt should
season it.

So the father and the mother sat down to the feast with their son and
his queen, but all the time they did not know him. The old king tasted
the food and tasted the food, but he could not eat of it.

“Do you not feel hungry?” said the young king.

“Alas,” said his father, “I crave your majesty’s pardon, but there is no
salt in the food.”

“And so is life lacking of savor without love,” said the young king;
“and yet because I loved you as salt you disowned me and cast me out
into the world.”

Therewith he could contain himself no longer, but with the tears running
down his cheeks kissed his father and his mother; and they knew him, and
kissed him again.

Afterwards the young king went with a great army into the country of
his elder brothers, and, overcoming them, set his father upon his throne
again. If ever the two got back their crowns you may be sure that they
wore them more modestly than they did the first time.


So the Fisherman who had one time unbottled the Genie whom Solomon the
Wise had stoppered up concluded his story, and all of the good folk who
were there began clapping their shadowy hands.

“Aye, aye,” said old Bidpai, “there is much truth in what you say, for
it is verily so that that which men call--love--is--the--salt--of--“....

His voice had been fading away thinner and thinner and smaller and
smaller--now it was like the shadow of a voice; now it trembled and
quivered out into silence and was gone.

And with the voice of old Bidpai the pleasant Land of Twilight was also
gone. As a breath fades away from a mirror, so had it faded and vanished
into nothingness.

I opened my eyes.

There was a yellow light--it came from the evening lamp. There were
people of flesh and blood around--my own dear people--and they were
talking together. There was the library with the rows of books looking
silently out from their shelves. There was the fire of hickory logs
crackling and snapping in the fireplace, and throwing a wavering, yellow
light on the wall.

Had I been asleep? No; I had been in Twilight Land.

And now the pleasant Twilight Land had gone. It had faded out, and I was
back again in the work-a-day world.

There I was sitting in my chair; and, what was more, it was time for the
children to go to bed.